T
1
The Surprising P ower of A tomic Habits
HE F ATE OF British Cycling changed one day in 2003. The
organization, which was the governing body for
professional cycling in Great Britain, had recently hired
Dave Brailsford as its new performance director . At the
time, professional cyclists in Great Britain had endured
nearly one hundred years of mediocrity . Since 1908, British
riders had won just a single gold medal at the Olympic
Games, and they had fared even worse in cycling’s biggest
race, the T our de France. In 110 years, no British cyclist
had ever won the event.
In fact, the performance of British riders had been so
underwhelming that one of the top bike manufacturers in
Europe refused to sell bikes to the team because they were
afraid that it would hurt sales if other professionals saw the
Brits using their gear .
Brailsford had been hired to put British Cycling on a new
trajectory . What made him diﬀerent from previous coaches
was his relentless commitment to a strategy that he
referred to as “the aggregation of marginal gains,” which
was the philosophy of searching for a tiny margin of
improvement in everything you do . Brailsford said, “ The
whole principle came from the idea that if you broke down
everything you could think of that goes into riding a bike,
and then improve it by 1 percent, you will get a signiﬁcant
increase when you put them all together .”
Brailsford and his coaches began by making small
adjustments you might expect from a professional cycling
team. They redesigned the bike seats to make them more
comfortable and rubbed alcohol on the tires for a better
grip. They asked riders to wear electrically heated
overshorts to maintain ideal muscle temperature while
riding and used biofeedback sensors to monitor how each
athlete responded to a particular workout. The team tested
various fabrics in a wind tunnel and had their outdoor
riders switch to indoor racing suits, which proved to be
lighter and more aerodynamic.
But they didn’t stop there. Brailsford and his team
continued to ﬁnd 1 percent improvements in overlooked
and unexpected areas. They tested diﬀerent types of
massage gels to see which one led to the fastest muscle
recovery . They hired a surgeon to teach each rider the best
way to wash their hands to reduce the chances of catching
a cold. They determined the type of pillow and mattress
that led to the best night’s sleep for each rider . They even
painted the inside of the team truck white, which helped
them spot little bits of dust that would normally slip by
unnoticed but could degrade the performance of the ﬁnely
tuned bikes.
As these and hundreds of other small improvements
accumulated, the results came faster than anyone could
have imagined.
Just ﬁve years after Brailsford took over , the British
Cycling team dominated the road and track cycling events
at the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing, where they won an
astounding 60 percent of the gold medals available. F our
years later , when the Olympic Games came to London, the
Brits raised the bar as they set nine Olympic records and
seven world records.
That same year , Bradley W iggins became the ﬁrst British
cyclist to win the T our de France. The next year , his
teammate Chris Froome won the race, and he would go on
to win again in 2015, 2016, and 2017, giving the British
team ﬁve T our de France victories in six years.
During the ten-year span from 2007 to 2017, British
cyclists won 178 world championships and sixty-six
Olympic or P aralympic gold medals and captured ﬁve T our
de France victories in what is widely regarded as the most
successful run in cycling history .*
How does this happen? How does a team of previously
ordinary athletes transform into world champions with tiny
changes that, at ﬁrst glance, would seem to make a modest
diﬀerence at best? Why do small improvements accumulate
into such remarkable results, and how can you replicate
this approach in your own life?
WHY SMALL HABITS MAKE A BIG DIFFERENCE
It is so easy to overestimate the importance of one deﬁning
moment and underestimate the value of making small
improvements on a daily basis. T oo often, we convince
ourselves that massive success requires massive action.
Whether it is losing weight, building a business, writing a
book, winning a championship, or achieving any other goal,
we put pressure on ourselves to make some earth-
shattering improvement that everyone will talk about.
Meanwhile, improving by 1 percent isn’t particularly
notable—sometimes it isn’t even noticeable —but it can be
far more meaningful, especially in the long run. The
diﬀerence a tiny improvement can make over time is
astounding. Here’s how the math works out: if you can get
1 percent better each day for one year , you’ll end up thirty-
seven times better by the time you’re done. Conversely , if
you get 1 percent worse each day for one year , you’ll
decline nearly down to zero . What starts as a small win or a
minor setback accumulates into something much more.
1% BET TER EVER Y DAY
1% worse every day for one year . 0.99365 = 00.03
1% better every day for one year . 1.01365 = 37.78
FIGURE 1:  The eﬀects of small habits compound over time. F or
example, if you can get just 1 per cent better each day, you’ll
end up with r esults that ar e nearly 37 times better af ter one
year.
Habits are the compound interest of self -improvement.
The same way that money multiplies through compound
interest, the eﬀects of your habits multiply as you repeat
them. They seem to make little diﬀerence on any given day
and yet the impact they deliver over the months and years
can be enormous. It is only when looking back two, ﬁve, or
perhaps ten years later that the value of good habits and
the cost of bad ones becomes strikingly apparent.
This can be a diﬀicult concept to appreciate in daily life.
We often dismiss small changes because they don’t seem to
matter very much in the moment. If you save a little money
now, you’re still not a millionaire. If you go to the gym three
days in a row , you’re still out of shape. If you study
Mandarin for an hour tonight, you still haven’t learned the
language. W e make a few changes, but the results never
seem to come quickly and so we slide back into our
previous routines.
Unfortunately , the slow pace of transformation also
makes it easy to let a bad habit slide. If you eat an
unhealthy meal today , the scale doesn’t move much. If you
work late tonight and ignore your family , they will forgive
you. If you procrastinate and put your project oﬀ until
tomorrow , there will usually be time to ﬁnish it later . A
single decision is easy to dismiss.
But when we repeat 1 percent errors, day after day , by
replicating poor decisions, duplicating tiny mistakes, and
rationalizing little excuses, our small choices compound
into toxic results. It’s the accumulation of many missteps—
a 1 percent decline here and there—that eventually leads to
a problem.
The impact created by a change in your habits is similar
to the eﬀect of shifting the route of an airplane by just a
few degrees. Imagine you are ﬂying from Los Angeles to
New Y ork City . If a pilot leaving from LAX adjusts the
heading just 3.5 degrees south, you will land in
Washington, D .C., instead of New Y ork. Such a small
change is barely noticeable at takeoﬀ—the nose of the
airplane moves just a few feet—but when magniﬁed across
the entire United States, you end up hundreds of miles
apart. *
Similarly , a slight change in your daily habits can guide
your life to a very diﬀerent destination. Making a choice
that is 1 percent better or 1 percent worse seems
insigniﬁcant in the moment, but over the span of moments
that make up a lifetime these choices determine the
diﬀerence between who you are and who you could be.
Success is the product of daily habits—not once-in-a-
lifetime transformations.
That said, it doesn’t matter how successful or
unsuccessful you are right now . What matters is whether
your habits are putting you on the path toward success. Y ou
should be far more concerned with your current trajectory
than with your current results. If you’re a millionaire but
you spend more than you earn each month, then you’re on
a bad trajectory . If your spending habits don’t change, it’s
not going to end well. Conversely , if you’re broke, but you
save a little bit every month, then you’re on the path
toward ﬁnancial freedom—even if you’re moving slower
than you’d like.
Your outcomes are a lagging measure of your habits.
Your net worth is a lagging measure of your ﬁnancial
habits. Y our weight is a lagging measure of your eating
habits. Y our knowledge is a lagging measure of your
learning habits. Y our clutter is a lagging measure of your
cleaning habits. Y ou get what you repeat.
If you want to predict where you’ll end up in life, all you
have to do is follow the curve of tiny gains or tiny losses,
and see how your daily choices will compound ten or
twenty years down the line. Are you spending less than you
earn each month? Are you making it into the gym each
week? Are you reading books and learning something new
each day? Tiny battles like these are the ones that will
deﬁne your future self .
Time magniﬁes the margin between success and failure.
It will multiply whatever you feed it. Good habits make time
your ally . Bad habits make time your enemy .
Habits are a double-edged sword. Bad habits can cut you
down just as easily as good habits can build you up, which
is why understanding the details is crucial. Y ou need to
know how habits work and how to design them to your
liking, so you can avoid the dangerous half of the blade.
YOUR HABITS CAN COMPOUND FOR Y OU OR AGAINST Y OU
Positive Compounding
Productivity compounds. Accomplishing one e xtra task is a small feat on
any given day, but it counts for a lot over an entir e car eer. The eﬀect of
automating an old task or mastering a new skill can be even gr eater . The mor e
tasks you can handle without thinking, the mor e your brain is fr ee to focus on
other ar eas.
Knowledge compounds. Learning one new idea won’t mak e you a genius,
but a commitment to lifelong lear ning can be transfor mative. F urther more,
each book you r ead not only teaches you something new but also opens up
diﬀer ent ways of thinking about old ideas. As W arren Buﬀett says, “That’s how
knowledge works. It builds up, lik e compound inter est.”
Relationships compound. People r eﬂect your behavior back to you. The
more you help others, the mor e others want to help you. Being a little bit nicer
in each interaction can r esult in a network of br oad and str ong connections
over time.
Negative Compounding
Stress compounds.  The frustration of a traﬃc jam. The weight of par enting
responsibilities. The wor ry of making ends meet. The strain of slightly high
blood pr essur e. By themselves, these common causes of str ess ar e
manageable. But when they persist for years, little str esses compound into
serious health issues.
Negative thoughts compound. The mor e you think of yourself as worthless,
stupid, or ugly, the mor e you condition yourself to interpr et life that way . You
get trapped in a thought loop. The same is true for how you think about others.
Once you fall into the habit of seeing people as angry, unjust, or selﬁsh, you
see those kind of people everywher e.
Outrage compounds. Riots, pr otests, and mass movements ar e rarely the
result of a single event. Instead, a long series of micr oaggr essions and daily
aggravations slowly multiply until one event tips the scales and outrage
spreads lik e wildﬁr e.
WHA T PROGRES S IS REALL Y LIKE
Imagine that you have an ice cube sitting on the table in
front of you. The room is cold and you can see your breath.
It is currently twenty-ﬁve degrees. Ever so slowly , the room
begins to heat up.
Twenty-six degrees.
Twenty-seven.
Twenty-eight.
The ice cube is still sitting on the table in front of you.
Twenty-nine degrees.
Thirty .
Thirty-one.
Still, nothing has happened.
Then, thirty-two degrees. The ice begins to melt. A one-
degree shift, seemingly no diﬀerent from the temperature
increases before it, has unlocked a huge change.
Breakthrough moments are often the result of many
previous actions, which build up the potential required to
unleash a major change. This pattern shows up
everywhere. Cancer spends 80 percent of its life
undetectable, then takes over the body in months. Bamboo
can barely be seen for the ﬁrst ﬁve years as it builds
extensive root systems underground before exploding
ninety feet into the air within six weeks.
Similarly , habits often appear to make no diﬀerence until
you cross a critical threshold and unlock a new level of
performance. In the early and middle stages of any quest,
there is often a V alley of Disappointment. Y ou expect to
make progress in a linear fashion and it’s frustrating how
ineﬀective changes can seem during the ﬁrst days, weeks,
and even months. It doesn’t feel like you are going
anywhere. It’s a hallmark of any compounding process: the
most powerful outcomes are delayed.
This is one of the core reasons why it is so hard to build
habits that last. P eople make a few small changes, fail to
see a tangible result, and decide to stop. Y ou think, “I’ve
been running every day for a month, so why can’t I see any
change in my body?” Once this kind of thinking takes over ,
it’s easy to let good habits fall by the wayside. But in order
to make a meaningful diﬀerence, habits need to persist
long enough to break through this plateau—what I call the
Plateau of Latent P otential .
If you ﬁnd yourself struggling to build a good habit or
break a bad one, it is not because you have lost your ability
to improve. It is often because you have not yet crossed the
Plateau of Latent P otential. Complaining about not
achieving success despite working hard is like complaining
about an ice cube not melting when you heated it from
twenty-ﬁve to thirty-one degrees. Y our work was not
wasted; it is just being stored. All the action happens at
thirty-two degrees.
When you ﬁnally break through the Plateau of Latent
Potential, people will call it an overnight success. The
outside world only sees the most dramatic event rather
than all that preceded it. But you know that it’s the work
you did long ago—when it seemed that you weren’t making
any progress—that makes the jump today possible.
It is the human equivalent of geological pressure. T wo
tectonic plates can grind against one another for millions of
years, the tension slowly building all the while. Then, one
day, they rub each other once again, in the same fashion
they have for ages, but this time the tension is too great. An
earthquake erupts. Change can take years—before it
happens all at once.
Mastery requires patience. The San Antonio Spurs, one
of the most successful teams in NBA history , have a quote
from social reformer Jacob Riis hanging in their locker
room: “ When nothing seems to help, I go and look at a
stonecutter hammering away at his rock, perhaps a
hundred times without as much as a crack showing in it.
Yet at the hundred and ﬁrst blow it will split in two, and I
know it was not that last blow that did it—but all that had
gone before.”
THE PLA TEAU OF LA TENT POTENTIAL
FIGURE 2:  We often e xpect pr ogress to be linear . At the very
least, we hope it will come quickly . In reality, the r esults of our
eﬀorts ar e often delayed. It is not until months or years later
that we r ealize the true value of the pr evious work we have
done. This can r esult in a “ valley of disappointment” wher e
people feel discouraged af ter putting in weeks or months of har d
work without e xperiencing any r esults. However, this work was
not wasted. It was simply being stor ed. It is not until much later
that the full value of pr evious eﬀorts is r evealed.
All big things come from small beginnings. The seed of
every habit is a single, tiny decision. But as that decision is
repeated, a habit sprouts and grows stronger . Roots
entrench themselves and branches grow . The task of
breaking a bad habit is like uprooting a powerful oak within
us. And the task of building a good habit is like cultivating
a delicate ﬂower one day at a time.
But what determines whether we stick with a habit long
enough to survive the Plateau of Latent P otential and break
through to the other side? What is it that causes some
people to slide into unwanted habits and enables others to
enjoy the compounding eﬀects of good ones?
FORGET ABOUT GO ALS, FOCUS ON SYSTEMS INSTEAD
Prevailing wisdom claims that the best way to achieve what
we want in life—getting into better shape, building a
successful business, relaxing more and worrying less,
spending more time with friends and family—is to set
speciﬁc, actionable goals.
For many years, this was how I approached my habits,
too. Each one was a goal to be reached. I set goals for the
grades I wanted to get in school, for the weights I wanted
to lift in the gym, for the proﬁts I wanted to earn in
business. I succeeded at a few , but I failed at a lot of them.
Eventually , I began to realize that my results had very little
to do with the goals I set and nearly everything to do with
the systems I followed.
What’s the diﬀerence between systems and goals? It’s a
distinction I ﬁrst learned from Scott Adams, the cartoonist
behind the Dilbert  comic. Goals are about the results you
want to achieve. Systems are about the processes that lead
to those results.
If you’re a coach, your goal might be to win a
championship. Y our system is the way you recruit
players, manage your assistant coaches, and conduct
practice.
If you’re an entrepreneur , your goal might be to build a
million-dollar business. Y our system is how you test
product ideas, hire employees, and run marketing
campaigns.
If you’re a musician, your goal might be to play a new
piece. Y our system is how often you practice, how you
break down and tackle diﬀicult measures, and your
method for receiving feedback from your instructor .
Now for the interesting question: If you completely
ignored your goals and focused only on your system, would
you still succeed? F or example, if you were a basketball
coach and you ignored your goal to win a championship
and focused only on what your team does at practice each
day, would you still get results?
I think you would.
The goal in any sport is to ﬁnish with the best score, but
it would be ridiculous to spend the whole game staring at
the scoreboard. The only way to actually win is to get
better each day . In the words of three-time Super Bowl
winner Bill W alsh, “The score takes care of itself .” The
same is true for other areas of life. If you want better
results, then forget about setting goals. F ocus on your
system instead.
What do I mean by this? Are goals completely useless?
Of course not. Goals are good for setting a direction, but
systems are best for making progress. A handful of
problems arise when you spend too much time thinking
about your goals and not enough time designing your
systems.
Problem #1: W inners and losers have the same goals.
Goal setting suﬀers from a serious case of survivorship
bias. W e concentrate on the people who end up winning—
the survivors—and mistakenly assume that ambitious goals
led to their success while overlooking all of the people who
had the same objective but didn’t succeed.
Every Olympian wants to win a gold medal. Every
candidate wants to get the job. And if successful and
unsuccessful people share the same goals, then the goal
cannot be what diﬀerentiates the winners from the losers.
It wasn’t the goal of winning the T our de France that
propelled the British cyclists to the top of the sport.
Presumably , they had wanted to win the race every year
before—just like every other professional team. The goal
had always been there. It was only when they implemented
a system  of continuous small improvements that they
achieved a diﬀerent outcome.
Problem #2: A chieving a goal is only a momentary change.
Imagine you have a messy room and you set a goal to clean
it. If you summon the energy to tidy up, then you will have
a clean room—for now . But if you maintain the same sloppy ,
pack -rat habits that led to a messy room in the ﬁrst place,
soon you’ll be looking at a new pile of clutter and hoping
for another burst of motivation. Y ou’re left chasing the
same outcome because you never changed the system
behind it. Y ou treated a symptom without addressing the
cause.
Achieving a goal only changes your life for the moment .
That’s the counterintuitive thing about improvement. W e
think we need to change our results, but the results are not
the problem. What we really need to change are the
systems that cause those results. When you solve problems
at the results level, you only solve them temporarily . In
order to improve for good, you need to solve problems at
the systems level. Fix the inputs and the outputs will ﬁx
themselves.
Problem #3: Goals r estrict your happiness.
The implicit assumption behind any goal is this: “Once I
reach my goal, then I’ll be happy .” The problem with a
goals-ﬁrst mentality is that you’re continually putting
happiness oﬀ until the next milestone. I’ve slipped into this
trap so many times I’ve lost count. F or years, happiness
was always something for my future self to enjoy . I
promised myself that once I gained twenty pounds of
muscle or after my business was featured in the New Y ork
Times , then I could ﬁnally relax.
Furthermore, goals create an “either-or” conﬂict: either
you achieve your goal and are successful or you fail and
you are a disappointment. Y ou mentally box yourself into a
narrow version of happiness. This is misguided. It is
unlikely that your actual path through life will match the
exact journey you had in mind when you set out. It makes
no sense to restrict your satisfaction to one scenario when
there are many paths to success.
A systems-ﬁrst mentality provides the antidote. When
you fall in love with the process rather than the product,
you don’t have to wait to give yourself permission to be
happy . You can be satisﬁed anytime your system is running.
And a system can be successful in many diﬀerent forms,
not just the one you ﬁrst envision.
Problem #4: Goals ar e at odds with long-ter m progress.
Finally , a goal-oriented mind-set can create a “yo-yo” eﬀect.
Many runners work hard for months, but as soon as they
cross the ﬁnish line, they stop training. The race is no
longer there to motivate them. When all of your hard work
is focused on a particular goal, what is left to push you
forward after you achieve it? This is why many people ﬁnd
themselves reverting to their old habits after accomplishing
a goal.
The purpose of setting goals is to win the game. The
purpose of building systems is to continue playing the
game. True long-term thinking is goal-less thinking. It’s not
about any single accomplishment. It is about the cycle of
endless reﬁnement and continuous improvement.
Ultimately , it is your commitment to the process  that will
determine your progress .
A SYSTEM OF A TOMIC HABITS
If you’re having trouble changing your habits, the problem
isn’t you. The problem is your system. Bad habits repeat
themselves again and again not because you don’t want to
change, but because you have the wrong system for
change.
You do not rise to the level of your goals. You fall to the
level of your systems.
Focusing on the overall system, rather than a single goal,
is one of the core themes of this book. It is also one of the
deeper meanings behind the word atomic . By now , you’ve
probably realized that an atomic habit refers to a tiny
change, a marginal gain, a 1 percent improvement. But
atomic habits are not just any old habits, however small.
They are little habits that are part of a larger system. Just
as atoms are the building blocks of molecules, atomic
habits are the building blocks of remarkable results.
Habits are like the atoms of our lives. Each one is a
fundamental unit that contributes to your overall
improvement. A t ﬁrst, these tiny routines seem
insigniﬁcant, but soon they build on each other and fuel
bigger wins that multiply to a degree that far outweighs the
cost of their initial investment. They are both small and
mighty . This is the meaning of the phrase atomic habits —a
regular practice or routine that is not only small and easy
to do, but also the source of incredible power; a component
of the system of compound growth.
Chapter Summary
Habits are the compound interest of self -improvement.
Getting 1 percent better every day counts for a lot in
the long-run.
Habits are a double-edged sword. They can work for
you or against you, which is why understanding the
details is essential.
Small changes often appear to make no diﬀerence until
you cross a critical threshold. The most powerful
outcomes of any compounding process are delayed.
You need to be patient.
An atomic habit is a little habit that is part of a larger
system. Just as atoms are the building blocks of
molecules, atomic habits are the building blocks of
remarkable results.
If you want better results, then forget about setting
goals. F ocus on your system instead.
You do not rise to the level of your goals. Y ou fall to the
level of your systems.