W
2
How Y our Habits Shape Y our Identity (and V ice Versa)
HY IS IT so easy to repeat bad habits and so hard to
form good ones? F ew things can have a more
powerful impact on your life than improving your daily
habits. And yet it is likely that this time next year you’ll be
doing the same thing rather than something better .
It often feels diﬀicult to keep good habits going for more
than a few days, even with sincere eﬀort and the occasional
burst of motivation. Habits like exercise, meditation,
journaling, and cooking are reasonable for a day or two and
then become a hassle.
However , once your habits are established, they seem to
stick around forever—especially the unwanted ones.
Despite our best intentions, unhealthy habits like eating
junk food, watching too much television, procrastinating,
and smoking can feel impossible to break.
Changing our habits is challenging for two reasons: (1)
we try to change the wrong thing and (2) we try to change
our habits in the wrong way . In this chapter , I’ll address the
ﬁrst point. In the chapters that follow , I’ll answer the
second.
Our ﬁrst mistake is that we try to change the wrong
thing. T o understand what I mean, consider that there are
three levels at which change can occur . You can imagine
them like the layers of an onion.
THREE LA YERS OF BEHA VIOR CHANGE
FIGURE 3:  Ther e are three layers of behavior change: a change
in your outcomes, a change in your pr ocesses, or a change in
your identity .
The ﬁrst layer is changing your outcomes.  This level
is concerned with changing your results: losing weight,
publishing a book, winning a championship. Most of the
goals you set are associated with this level of change.
The second layer is changing your process.  This
level is concerned with changing your habits and systems:
implementing a new routine at the gym, decluttering your
desk for better workﬂow , developing a meditation practice.
Most of the habits you build are associated with this level.
The third and deepest layer is changing your
identity . This level is concerned with changing your
beliefs: your worldview , your self -image, your judgments
about yourself and others. Most of the beliefs, assumptions,
and biases you hold are associated with this level.
Outcomes are about what you get. Processes are about
what you do . Identity is about what you believe. When it
comes to building habits that last—when it comes to
building a system of 1 percent improvements—the problem
is not that one level is “better” or “worse” than another . All
levels of change are useful in their own way . The problem is
the direction  of change.
Many people begin the process of changing their habits
by focusing on what  they want to achieve. This leads us to
outcome-based habits. The alternative is to build identity-
based habits. W ith this approach, we start by focusing on
who we wish to become.
OUTCOME-BASED HABITS
IDENTITY -BASED HABITS
FIGURE 4:  With outcome-based habits, the focus is on what you
want to achieve. W ith identity -based habits, the focus is on who
you wish to become.
Imagine two people resisting a cigarette. When oﬀered a
smoke, the ﬁrst person says, “No thanks. I’m trying to
quit.” It sounds like a reasonable response, but this person
still believes they are a smoker who is trying to be
something else. They are hoping their behavior will change
while carrying around the same beliefs.
The second person declines by saying, “No thanks. I’m
not a smoker .” It’s a small diﬀerence, but this statement
signals a shift in identity . Smoking was part of their former
life, not their current one. They no longer identify as
someone who smokes.
Most people don’t even consider identity change when
they set out to improve. They just think, “I want to be
skinny (outcome) and if I stick to this diet, then I’ll be
skinny (process).” They set goals and determine the actions
they should take to achieve those goals without considering
the beliefs that drive their actions. They never shift the way
they look at themselves, and they don’t realize that their
old identity can sabotage their new plans for change.
Behind every system of actions are a system of beliefs.
The system of a democracy is founded on beliefs like
freedom, majority rule, and social equality . The system of a
dictatorship has a very diﬀerent set of beliefs like absolute
authority and strict obedience. Y ou can imagine many ways
to try to get more people to vote in a democracy , but such
behavior change would never get oﬀ the ground in a
dictatorship. That’s not the identity of the system. V oting is
a behavior that is impossible under a certain set of beliefs.
A similar pattern exists whether we are discussing
individuals, organizations, or societies. There are a set of
beliefs and assumptions that shape the system, an identity
behind the habits.
Behavior that is incongruent with the self will not last.
You may want more money , but if your identity is someone
who consumes rather than creates, then you’ll continue to
be pulled toward spending rather than earning. Y ou may
want better health, but if you continue to prioritize comfort
over accomplishment, you’ll be drawn to relaxing rather
than training. It’s hard to change your habits if you never
change the underlying beliefs that led to your past
behavior . You have a new goal and a new plan, but you
haven’t changed who you are.
The story of Brian Clark, an entrepreneur from Boulder ,
Colorado, provides a good example. “F or as long as I can
remember , I’ve chewed my ﬁngernails,” Clark told me. “It
started as a nervous habit when I was young, and then
morphed into an undesirable grooming ritual. One day , I
resolved to stop chewing my nails until they grew out a bit.
Through mindful willpower alone, I managed to do it.”
Then, Clark did something surprising.
“I asked my wife to schedule my ﬁrst-ever manicure,” he
said. “My thought was that if I started paying to maintain
my nails, I wouldn’t chew them. And it worked, but not for
the monetary reason. What happened was the manicure
made my ﬁngers look really nice for the ﬁrst time. The
manicurist even said that—other than the chewing—I had
really healthy , attractive nails. Suddenly , I was proud of my
ﬁngernails. And even though that’s something I had never
aspired to, it made all the diﬀerence. I’ve never chewed my
nails since; not even a single close call. And it’s because I
now take pride in properly caring for them.”
The ultimate form of intrinsic motivation is when a habit
becomes part of your identity . It’s one thing to say I’m the
type of person who wants  this. It’s something very diﬀerent
to say I’m the type of person who is this.
The more pride you have in a particular aspect of your
identity , the more motivated you will be to maintain the
habits associated with it. If you’re proud of how your hair
looks, you’ll develop all sorts of habits to care for and
maintain it. If you’re proud of the size of your biceps, you’ll
make sure you never skip an upper-body workout. If you’re
proud of the scarves you knit, you’ll be more likely to spend
hours knitting each week. Once your pride gets involved,
you’ll ﬁght tooth and nail to maintain your habits.
True behavior change is identity change. Y ou might start
a habit because of motivation, but the only reason you’ll
stick with one is that it becomes part of your identity .
Anyone can convince themselves to visit the gym or eat
healthy once or twice, but if you don’t shift the belief
behind the behavior , then it is hard to stick with long-term
changes. Improvements are only temporary until they
become part of who you are.
The goal is not to read a book, the goal is to become  a
reader .
The goal is not to run a marathon, the goal is to
become  a runner .
The goal is not to learn an instrument, the goal is to
become  a musician.
Your behaviors are usually a reﬂection of your identity .
What you do is an indication of the type of person you
believe that you are—either consciously or nonconsciously .*
Research has shown that once a person believes in a
particular aspect of their identity , they are more likely to
act in alignment with that belief . For example, people who
identiﬁed as “being a voter” were more likely to vote than
those who simply claimed “voting” was an action they
wanted to perform. Similarly , the person who incorporates
exercise into their identity doesn’t have to convince
themselves to train. Doing the right thing is easy . After all,
when your behavior and your identity are fully aligned, you
are no longer pursuing behavior change. Y ou are simply
acting like the type of person you already believe yourself
to be.
Like all aspects of habit formation, this, too, is a double-
edged sword. When working for you, identity change can
be a powerful force for self -improvement. When working
against you, though, identity change can be a curse. Once
you have adopted an identity , it can be easy to let your
allegiance to it impact your ability to change. Many people
walk through life in a cognitive slumber , blindly following
the norms attached to their identity .
“I’m terrible with directions.”
“I’m not a morning person.”
“I’m bad at remembering people’s names.”
“I’m always late.”
“I’m not good with technology .”
“I’m horrible at math.”
. . . and a thousand other variations.
When you have repeated a story to yourself for years, it
is easy to slide into these mental grooves and accept them
as a fact. In time, you begin to resist certain actions
because “that’s not who I am.” There is internal pressure to
maintain your self -image and behave in a way that is
consistent with your beliefs. Y ou ﬁnd whatever way you can
to avoid contradicting yourself .
The more deeply a thought or action is tied to your
identity , the more diﬀicult it is to change it. It can feel
comfortable to believe what your culture believes (group
identity) or to do what upholds your self -image (personal
identity), even if it’s wrong. The biggest barrier to positive
change at any level—individual, team, society—is identity
conﬂict. Good habits can make rational sense, but if they
conﬂict with your identity , you will fail to put them into
action.
On any given day , you may struggle with your habits
because you’re too busy or too tired or too overwhelmed or
hundreds of other reasons. Over the long run, however , the
real reason you fail to stick with habits is that your self -
image gets in the way . This is why you can’t get too
attached to one version of your identity . Progress requires
unlearning. Becoming the best version of yourself requires
you to continuously edit your beliefs, and to upgrade and
expand your identity .
This brings us to an important question: If your beliefs
and worldview play such an important role in your
behavior , where do they come from in the ﬁrst place? How ,
exactly , is your identity formed? And how can you
emphasize new aspects of your identity that serve you and
gradually erase the pieces that hinder you?
THE TWO -STEP PROCES S TO CHANGING Y OUR
IDENTITY
Your identity emerges out of your habits. Y ou are not born
with preset beliefs. Every belief , including those about
yourself , is learned and conditioned through experience. *
More precisely , your habits are how you embody  your
identity . When you make your bed each day , you embody
the identity of an organized person. When you write each
day, you embody the identity of a creative person. When
you train each day , you embody the identity of an athletic
person.
The more you repeat a behavior , the more you reinforce
the identity associated with that behavior . In fact, the word
identity  was originally derived from the Latin words
essentitas , which means being,  and identidem , which
means repeatedly . Your identity is literally your “repeated
beingness.”
Whatever your identity is right now , you only believe it
because you have proof of it. If you go to church every
Sunday for twenty years, you have evidence that you are
religious. If you study biology for one hour every night, you
have evidence that you are studious. If you go to the gym
even when it’s snowing, you have evidence that you are
committed to ﬁtness. The more evidence you have for a
belief , the more strongly you will believe it.
For most of my early life, I didn’t consider myself a
writer . If you were to ask any of my high school teachers or
college professors, they would tell you I was an average
writer at best: certainly not a standout. When I began my
writing career , I published a new article every Monday and
Thursday for the ﬁrst few years. As the evidence grew , so
did my identity as a writer . I didn’t start out as a writer . I
became  one through my habits.
Of course, your habits are not the only actions that
inﬂuence your identity , but by virtue of their frequency they
are usually the most important ones. Each experience in
life modiﬁes your self -image, but it’s unlikely you would
consider yourself a soccer player because you kicked a ball
once or an artist because you scribbled a picture. As you
repeat these actions, however , the evidence accumulates
and your self -image begins to change. The eﬀect of one-oﬀ
experiences tends to fade away while the eﬀect of habits
gets reinforced with time, which means your habits
contribute most of the evidence that shapes your identity .
In this way , the process of building habits is actually the
process of becoming yourself .
This is a gradual evolution. W e do not change by
snapping our ﬁngers and deciding to be someone entirely
new. We change bit by bit, day by day , habit by habit. W e
are continually undergoing microevolutions of the self .
Each habit is like a suggestion: “Hey , maybe this is who I
am.” If you ﬁnish a book, then perhaps you are the type of
person who likes reading. If you go to the gym, then
perhaps you are the type of person who likes exercise. If
you practice playing the guitar , perhaps you are the type of
person who likes music.
Every action you take is a vote for the type of person you
wish to become. No single instance will transform your
beliefs, but as the votes build up, so does the evidence of
your new identity . This is one reason why meaningful
change does not require radical change. Small habits can
make a meaningful diﬀerence by providing evidence of a
new identity . And if a change is meaningful, it actually is
big. That’s the paradox of making small improvements.
Putting this all together , you can see that habits are the
path to changing your identity . The most practical way to
change who you are is to change what  you do .
Each time you write a page, you are a writer .
Each time you practice the violin, you are a musician.
Each time you start a workout, you are an athlete.
Each time you encourage your employees, you are a
leader .
Each habit not only gets results but also teaches you
something far more important: to trust yourself . You start
to believe you can actually accomplish these things. When
the votes mount up and the evidence begins to change, the
story you tell yourself begins to change as well.
Of course, it works the opposite way , too. Every time you
choose to perform a bad habit, it’s a vote for that identity .
The good news is that you don’t need to be perfect. In any
election, there are going to be votes for both sides. Y ou
don’t need a unanimous vote to win an election; you just
need a majority . It doesn’t matter if you cast a few votes for
a bad behavior or an unproductive habit. Y our goal is
simply to win the majority of the time.
New identities require new evidence. If you keep casting
the same votes you’ve always cast, you’re going to get the
same results you’ve always had. If nothing changes,
nothing is going to change.
It is a simple two-step process:
1. Decide the type of person you want to be.
2. Prove it to yourself with small wins.
First, decide who you want to be. This holds at any level
—as an individual, as a team, as a community , as a nation.
What do you want to stand for? What are your principles
and values? Who do you wish to become?
These are big questions, and many people aren’t sure
where to begin—but they do know what kind of results they
want: to get six -pack abs or to feel less anxious or to double
their salary . That’s ﬁne. Start there and work backward
from the results you want to the type of person who could
get those results. Ask yourself , “Who is the type of person
that could get the outcome I want?” Who is the type of
person that could lose forty pounds? Who is the type of
person that could learn a new language? Who is the type of
person that could run a successful start-up?
For example, “ Who is the type of person who could write
a book?” It’s probably someone who is consistent and
reliable. Now your focus shifts from writing a book
(outcome-based) to being the type of person who is
consistent and reliable (identity-based).
This process can lead to beliefs like:
“I’m the kind of teacher who stands up for her
students.”
“I’m the kind of doctor who gives each patient the time
and empathy they need.”
“I’m the kind of manager who advocates for her
employees.”
Once you have a handle on the type of person you want
to be, you can begin taking small steps to reinforce your
desired identity . I have a friend who lost over 100 pounds
by asking herself , “What would a healthy person do?” All
day long, she would use this question as a guide. W ould a
healthy person walk or take a cab? W ould a healthy person
order a burrito or a salad? She ﬁgured if she acted like a
healthy person long enough, eventually she would become
that person. She was right.
The concept of identity-based habits is our ﬁrst
introduction to another key theme in this book: feedback
loops. Y our habits shape your identity , and your identity
shapes your habits. It’s a two-way street. The formation of
all habits is a feedback loop (a concept we will explore in
depth in the next chapter), but it’s important to let your
values, principles, and identity drive the loop rather than
your results. The focus should always be on becoming that
type of person, not getting a particular outcome.
THE REAL REASON HABITS MA TTER
Identity change is the North Star of habit change. The
remainder of this book will provide you with step-by-step
instructions on how to build better habits in yourself , your
family , your team, your company , and anywhere else you
wish. But the true question is: “ Are you becoming the type
of person you want to become?” The ﬁrst step is not what
or how, but who. You need to know who you want to be.
Otherwise, your quest for change is like a boat without a
rudder . And that’s why we are starting here.
You have the power to change your beliefs about
yourself . Your identity is not set in stone. Y ou have a choice
in every moment. Y ou can choose the identity you want to
reinforce today with the habits you choose today . And this
brings us to the deeper purpose of this book and the real
reason habits matter .
Building better habits isn’t about littering your day with
life hacks. It’s not about ﬂossing one tooth each night or
taking a cold shower each morning or wearing the same
outﬁt each day . It’s not about achieving external measures
of success like earning more money , losing weight, or
reducing stress. Habits can help you achieve all of these
things, but fundamentally they are not about having
something. They are about becoming  someone.
Ultimately , your habits matter because they help you
become the type of person you wish to be. They are the
channel through which you develop your deepest beliefs
about yourself . Quite literally , you become your habits.
Chapter Summary
There are three levels of change: outcome change,
process change, and identity change.
The most eﬀective way to change your habits is to
focus not on what you want to achieve, but on who you
wish to become.
Your identity emerges out of your habits. Every action
is a vote for the type of person you wish to become.
Becoming the best version of yourself requires you to
continuously edit your beliefs, and to upgrade and
expand your identity .
The real reason habits matter is not because they can
get you better results (although they can do that), but
because they can change your beliefs about yourself .