I
3
How to Build Better Habits in 4 Simple Steps
N 1898 , A psychologist named Edward Thorndike
conducted an experiment that would lay the foundation
for our understanding of how habits form and the rules that
guide our behavior . Thorndike was interested in studying
the behavior of animals, and he started by working with
cats.
He would place each cat inside a device known as a
puzzle box. The box was designed so that the cat could
escape through a door “ by some simple act, such as pulling
at a loop of cord, pressing a lever , or stepping on a
platform.” F or example, one box contained a lever that,
when pressed, would open a door on the side of the box.
Once the door had been opened, the cat could dart out and
run over to a bowl of food.
Most cats wanted to escape as soon as they were placed
inside the box. They would poke their nose into the corners,
stick their paws through openings, and claw at loose
objects. A fter a few minutes of exploration, the cats would
happen to press the magical lever , the door would open,
and they would escape.
Thorndike tracked the behavior of each cat across many
trials. In the beginning, the animals moved around the box
at random. But as soon as the lever had been pressed and
the door opened, the process of learning began. Gradually ,
each cat learned to associate the action of pressing the
lever with the reward of escaping the box and getting to
the food.
After twenty to thirty trials, this behavior became so
automatic and habitual that the cat could escape within a
few seconds. F or example, Thorndike noted, “Cat 12 took
the following times to perform the act. 160 seconds, 30
seconds, 90 seconds, 60, 15, 28, 20, 30, 22, 11, 15, 20, 12,
10, 14, 10, 8, 8, 5, 10, 8, 6, 6, 7.”
During the ﬁrst three trials, the cat escaped in an
average of 1.5 minutes. During the last three trials, it
escaped in an average of 6.3 seconds. W ith practice, each
cat made fewer errors and their actions became quicker
and more automatic. R ather than repeat the same
mistakes, the cat began to cut straight to the solution.
From his studies, Thorndike described the learning
process by stating, “ behaviors followed by satisfying
consequences tend to be repeated and those that produce
unpleasant consequences are less likely to be repeated.”
His work provides the perfect starting point for discussing
how habits form in our own lives. It also provides answers
to some fundamental questions like: What are habits? And
why does the brain bother building them at all?
WHY Y OUR BRAIN BUILDS HABITS
A habit is a behavior that has been repeated enough times
to become automatic. The process of habit formation
begins with trial and error . Whenever you encounter a new
situation in life, your brain has to make a decision. How do
I respond to this?  The ﬁrst time you come across a
problem, you’re not sure how to solve it. Like Thorndike’s
cat, you’re just trying things out to see what works.
Neurological activity in the brain is high during this
period. Y ou are carefully analyzing the situation and
making conscious decisions about how to act. Y ou’re taking
in tons of new information and trying to make sense of it
all. The brain is busy learning the most eﬀective course of
action.
Occasionally , like a cat pressing on a lever , you stumble
across a solution. Y ou’re feeling anxious, and you discover
that going for a run calms you down. Y ou’re mentally
exhausted from a long day of work, and you learn that
playing video games relaxes you. Y ou’re exploring,
exploring, exploring, and then—BAM—a reward.
After you stumble upon an unexpected reward, you alter
your strategy for next time. Y our brain immediately begins
to catalog the events that preceded the reward. Wait a
minute—that felt good. What did I do right before that?
This is the feedback loop behind all human behavior: try ,
fail, learn, try diﬀerently . With practice, the useless
movements fade away and the useful actions get
reinforced. That’s a habit forming.
Whenever you face a problem repeatedly , your brain
begins to automate the process of solving it. Y our habits
are just a series of automatic solutions that solve the
problems and stresses you face regularly . As behavioral
scientist Jason Hreha writes, “ Habits are, simply , reliable
solutions to recurring problems in our environment.”
As habits are created, the level of activity in the brain
decreases . You learn to lock in on the cues that predict
success and tune out everything else. When a similar
situation arises in the future, you know exactly what to look
for. There is no longer a need to analyze every angle of a
situation. Y our brain skips the process of trial and error and
creates a mental rule: if this, then that. These cognitive
scripts can be followed automatically whenever the
situation is appropriate. Now , whenever you feel stressed,
you get the itch to run. As soon as you walk in the door
from work, you grab the video game controller . A choice
that once required eﬀort is now automatic. A habit has
been created.
Habits are mental shortcuts learned from experience. In
a sense, a habit is just a memory of the steps you previously
followed to solve a problem in the past. Whenever the
conditions are right, you can draw on this memory and
automatically apply the same solution. The primary reason
the brain remembers the past is to better predict what will
work in the future.
Habit formation is incredibly useful because the
conscious mind is the bottleneck of the brain. It can only
pay attention to one problem at a time. As a result, your
brain is always working to preserve your conscious
attention for whatever task is most essential. Whenever
possible, the conscious mind likes to pawn oﬀ tasks to the
nonconscious mind to do automatically . This is precisely
what happens when a habit is formed. Habits reduce
cognitive load and free up mental capacity , so you can
allocate your attention to other tasks.
Despite their eﬀiciency , some people still wonder about
the beneﬁts of habits. The argument goes like this: “ Will
habits make my life dull? I don’t want to pigeonhole myself
into a lifestyle I don’t enjoy . Doesn’t so much routine take
away the vibrancy and spontaneity of life?” Hardly . Such
questions set up a false dichotomy . They make you think
that you have to choose between building habits and
attaining freedom. In reality , the two complement each
other .
Habits do not restrict freedom. They create it. In fact,
the people who don’t have their habits handled are often
the ones with the least  amount of freedom. W ithout good
ﬁnancial habits, you will always be struggling for the next
dollar . Without good health habits, you will always seem to
be short on energy . Without good learning habits, you will
always feel like you’re behind the curve. If you’re always
being forced to make decisions about simple tasks—when
should I work out, where do I go to write, when do I pay
the bills—then you have less time for freedom. It’s only by
making the fundamentals of life easier that you can create
the mental space needed for free thinking and creativity .
Conversely , when you have your habits dialed in and the
basics of life are handled and done, your mind is free to
focus on new challenges and master the next set of
problems. Building habits in the present allows you to do
more of what you want in the future.
THE SCIENCE OF HOW HABITS WORK
The process of building a habit can be divided into four
simple steps: cue, craving, response, and reward. *
Breaking it down into these fundamental parts can help us
understand what a habit is, how it works, and how to
improve it.
FIGURE 5:  All habits pr oceed thr ough four stages in the same
order: cue, craving, r esponse, and r ewar d.
This four-step pattern is the backbone of every habit, and
your brain runs through these steps in the same order each
time.
First, there is the cue. The cue triggers your brain to
initiate a behavior . It is a bit of information that predicts a
reward. Our prehistoric ancestors were paying attention to
cues that signaled the location of primary rewards like
food, water , and sex. T oday, we spend most of our time
learning cues that predict secondary rewards like money
and fame, power and status, praise and approval, love and
friendship, or a sense of personal satisfaction. (Of course,
these pursuits also indirectly improve our odds of survival
and reproduction, which is the deeper motive behind
everything we do .)
Your mind is continuously analyzing your internal and
external environment for hints of where rewards are
located. Because the cue is the ﬁrst indication that we’re
close to a reward, it naturally leads to a craving.
Cravings are the second step, and they are the
motivational force behind every habit. W ithout some level
of motivation or desire—without craving a change—we
have no reason to act. What you crave is not the habit itself
but the change in state it delivers. Y ou do not crave
smoking a cigarette, you crave the feeling of relief it
provides. Y ou are not motivated by brushing your teeth but
rather by the feeling of a clean mouth. Y ou do not want to
turn on the television, you want to be entertained. Every
craving is linked to a desire to change your internal state.
This is an important point that we will discuss in detail
later.
Cravings diﬀer from person to person. In theory , any
piece of information could trigger a craving, but in
practice, people are not motivated by the same cues. F or a
gambler , the sound of slot machines can be a potent trigger
that sparks an intense wave of desire. F or someone who
rarely gambles, the jingles and chimes of the casino are
just background noise. Cues are meaningless until they are
interpreted. The thoughts, feelings, and emotions of the
observer are what transform a cue into a craving.
The third step is the response. The response is the actual
habit you perform, which can take the form of a thought or
an action. Whether a response occurs depends on how
motivated you are and how much friction is associated with
the behavior . If a particular action requires more physical
or mental eﬀort than you are willing to expend, then you
won’t do it. Y our response also depends on your ability . It
sounds simple, but a habit can occur only if you are capable
of doing it. If you want to dunk a basketball but can’t jump
high enough to reach the hoop, well, you’re out of luck.
Finally , the response delivers a reward. Rewards are the
end goal of every habit. The cue is about noticing the
reward. The craving is about wanting the reward. The
response is about obtaining the reward. W e chase rewards
because they serve two purposes: (1) they satisfy us and (2)
they teach us.
The ﬁrst purpose of rewards is to satisfy your craving .
Yes, rewards provide beneﬁts on their own. F ood and water
deliver the energy you need to survive. Getting a promotion
brings more money and respect. Getting in shape improves
your health and your dating prospects. But the more
immediate beneﬁt is that rewards satisfy your craving to
eat or to gain status or to win approval. A t least for a
moment, rewards deliver contentment and relief from
craving.
Second, rewards teach us which actions are worth
remembering in the future. Y our brain is a reward detector .
As you go about your life, your sensory nervous system is
continuously monitoring which actions satisfy your desires
and deliver pleasure. Feelings of pleasure and
disappointment are part of the feedback mechanism that
helps your brain distinguish useful actions from useless
ones. Rewards close the feedback loop and complete the
habit cycle.
If a behavior is insuﬀicient in any of the four stages, it
will not become a habit. Eliminate the cue and your habit
will never start. Reduce the craving and you won’t
experience enough motivation to act. Make the behavior
diﬀicult and you won’t be able to do it. And if the reward
fails to satisfy your desire, then you’ll have no reason to do
it again in the future. W ithout the ﬁrst three steps, a
behavior will not occur . Without all four , a behavior will not
be repeated.
THE HABIT L OOP
FIGURE 6:  The four stages of habit ar e best described as a
feedback loop. They for m an endless cycle that is running every
moment you ar e alive. This “habit loop” is continually scanning
the envir onment, pr edicting what will happen ne xt, trying out
diﬀer ent responses, and lear ning fr om the r esults. *
In summary , the cue triggers a craving, which motivates
a response, which provides a reward, which satisﬁes the
craving and, ultimately , becomes associated with the cue.
Together , these four steps form a neurological feedback
loop—cue, craving, response, reward; cue, craving,
response, reward—that ultimately allows you to create
automatic habits. This cycle is known as the habit loop.
This four-step process is not something that happens
occasionally , but rather it is an endless feedback loop that
is running and active during every moment you are alive—
even now . The brain is continually scanning the
environment, predicting what will happen next, trying out
diﬀerent responses, and learning from the results. The
entire process is completed in a split second, and we use it
again and again without realizing everything that has been
packed into the previous moment.
We can split these four steps into two phases: the
problem phase and the solution phase. The problem phase
includes the cue and the craving, and it is when you realize
that something needs to change. The solution phase
includes the response and the reward, and it is when you
take action and achieve the change you desire.
Problem phase
1. Cue
2. Craving
Solution phase
3. Response
4. Reward
All behavior is driven by the desire to solve a problem.
Sometimes the problem is that you notice something good
and you want to obtain it. Sometimes the problem is that
you are experiencing pain and you want to relieve it. Either
way, the purpose of every habit is to solve the problems you
face.
In the table on the following page, you can see a few
examples of what this looks like in real life.
Imagine walking into a dark room and ﬂipping on the
light switch. Y ou have performed this simple habit so many
times that it occurs without thinking. Y ou proceed through
all four stages in the fraction of a second. The urge to act
strikes you without thinking.
Problem phase
1. Cue:  Your phone buzzes with a new te xt message.
2. Craving:  You want to lear n the contents of the message.
Solution phase
3. Response:  You grab your phone and r ead the te xt.
4. Reward:  You satisf y your craving to r ead the message. Grabbing your
phone becomes associated with your phone buzzing.
Problem phase
1. Cue:  You ar e answering emails.
2. Craving:  You begin to feel str essed and overwhelmed by work. Y ou want to
feel in contr ol.
Solution phase
3. Response:  You bite your nails.
4. Reward:  You satisf y your craving to r educe str ess. Biting your nails
becomes associated with answering email.
Problem phase
1. Cue:  You wak e up.
2. Craving:  You want to feel alert.
Solution phase
3. Response:  You drink a cup of coﬀee.
4. Reward:  You satisf y your craving to feel alert. Drinking coﬀee becomes
associated with waking up.
Problem phase
1. Cue:  You smell a doughnut shop as you walk down the str eet near your
oﬃce.
2. Craving:  You begin to crave a doughnut.
Solution phase
3. Response:  You buy a doughnut and eat it.
4. Reward:  You satisf y your craving to eat a doughnut. Buying a doughnut
becomes associated with walking down the str eet near your oﬃce.
Problem phase
1. Cue:  You hit a stumbling block on a pr oject at work.
2. Craving:  You feel stuck and want to r elieve your frustration.
Solution phase
3. Response:  You pull out your phone and check social media.
4. Reward:  You satisf y your craving to feel r elieved. Checking social media
becomes associated with feeling stalled at work.
Problem phase
1. Cue:  You walk into a dark r oom.
2. Craving:  You want to be able to see.
Solution phase
3. Response:  You ﬂip the light switch.
4. Reward:  You satisf y your craving to see. T urning on the light switch
becomes associated with being in a dark r oom.
By the time we become adults, we rarely notice the
habits that are running our lives. Most of us never give a
second thought to the fact that we tie the same shoe ﬁrst
each morning, or unplug the toaster after each use, or
always change into comfortable clothes after getting home
from work. A fter decades of mental programming, we
automatically slip into these patterns of thinking and
acting.
THE FOUR LA WS OF BEHA VIOR CHANGE
In the following chapters, we will see time and again how
the four stages of cue, craving, response, and reward
inﬂuence nearly everything we do each day . But before we
do that, we need to transform these four steps into a
practical framework that we can use to design good habits
and eliminate bad ones.
I refer to this framework as the Four Laws of Behavior
Change , and it provides a simple set of rules for creating
good habits and breaking bad ones. Y ou can think of each
law as a lever that inﬂuences human behavior . When the
levers are in the right positions, creating good habits is
eﬀortless. When they are in the wrong positions, it is nearly
impossible.
How to Create a Good Habit
The 1st law (Cue):  Make it obvious.
The 2nd law (Craving):  Make it attractive.
The 3rd law (Response):  Make it easy .
The 4th law (Reward):  Make it satisf ying.
We can invert these laws to learn how to break a bad
habit.
How to Break a Bad Habit
Inversion of the 1st law (Cue):  Make it invisible.
Inversion of the 2nd law (Craving):  Make it unattractive.
Inversion of the 3rd law (Response):  Make it diﬃcult.
Inversion of the 4th law (Reward):  Make it unsatisf ying.
It would be irresponsible for me to claim that these four
laws are an exhaustive framework for changing any human
behavior , but I think they’re close. As you will soon see, the
Four Laws of Behavior Change apply to nearly every ﬁeld,
from sports to politics, art to medicine, comedy to
management. These laws can be used no matter what
challenge you are facing. There is no need for completely
diﬀerent strategies for each habit.
Whenever you want to change your behavior , you can
simply ask yourself:
1. How can I make it obvious?
2. How can I make it attractive?
3. How can I make it easy?
4. How can I make it satisfying?
If you have ever wondered, “ Why don’t I do what I say
I’m going to do? Why don’t I lose the weight or stop
smoking or save for retirement or start that side business?
Why do I say something is important but never seem to
make time for it?” The answers to those questions can be
found somewhere in these four laws. The key to creating
good habits and breaking bad ones is to understand these
fundamental laws and how to alter them to your
speciﬁcations. Every goal is doomed to fail if it goes against
the grain of human nature.
Your habits are shaped by the systems in your life. In the
chapters that follow , we will discuss these laws one by one
and show how you can use them to create a system in
which good habits emerge naturally and bad habits wither
away .
Chapter Summary
A habit is a behavior that has been repeated enough
times to become automatic.
The ultimate purpose of habits is to solve the problems
of life with as little energy and eﬀort as possible.
Any habit can be broken down into a feedback loop
that involves four steps: cue, craving, response, and
reward.
The F our Laws of Behavior Change are a simple set of
rules we can use to build better habits. They are (1)
make it obvious, (2) make it attractive, (3) make it easy ,
and (4) make it satisfying.