4
The Man Who Didn’t L ook Right
THE PSY CHOLOGIST GARY Klein once told me a story about a
woman who attended a family gathering. She had spent
years working as a paramedic and, upon arriving at the
event, took one look at her father-in-law and got very
concerned.
“I don’t like the way you look,” she said.
Her father-in-law , who was feeling perfectly ﬁne, jokingly
replied, “ Well, I don’t like your looks, either .”
“No,” she insisted. “ You need to go to the hospital now .”
A few hours later , the man was undergoing lifesaving
surgery after an examination had revealed that he had a
blockage to a major artery and was at immediate risk of a
heart attack. W ithout his daughter-in-law’s intuition, he
could have died.
What did the paramedic see? How did she predict his
impending heart attack?
When major arteries are obstructed, the body focuses on
sending blood to critical organs and away from peripheral
locations near the surface of the skin. The result is a
change in the pattern of distribution of blood in the face.
After many years of working with people with heart failure,
the woman had unknowingly developed the ability to
recognize this pattern on sight. She couldn’t explain what it
was that she noticed in her father-in-law’s face, but she
knew something was wrong.
Similar stories exist in other ﬁelds. F or example, military
analysts can identify which blip on a radar screen is an
enemy missile and which one is a plane from their own ﬂeet
even though they are traveling at the same speed, ﬂying at
the same altitude, and look identical on radar in nearly
every respect. During the Gulf W ar, Lieutenant Commander
Michael Riley saved an entire battleship when he ordered a
missile shot down—despite the fact that it looked exactly
like the battleship’s own planes on radar . He made the
right call, but even his superior oﬀicers couldn’t explain
how he did it.
Museum curators have been known to discern the
diﬀerence between an authentic piece of art and an
expertly produced counterfeit even though they can’t tell
you precisely which details tipped them oﬀ . Experienced
radiologists can look at a brain scan and predict the area
where a stroke will develop before any obvious signs are
visible to the untrained eye. I’ve even heard of hairdressers
noticing whether a client is pregnant based only on the feel
of her hair .
The human brain is a prediction machine. It is
continuously taking in your surroundings and analyzing the
information it comes across. Whenever you experience
something repeatedly—like a paramedic seeing the face of
a heart attack patient or a military analyst seeing a missile
on a radar screen—your brain begins noticing what is
important, sorting through the details and highlighting the
relevant cues, and cataloging that information for future
use.
With enough practice, you can pick up on the cues that
predict certain outcomes without consciously thinking
about it. Automatically , your brain encodes the lessons
learned through experience. W e can’t always explain what
it is we are learning, but learning is happening all along the
way, and your ability to notice the relevant cues in a given
situation is the foundation for every habit you have.
We underestimate how much our brains and bodies can
do without thinking. Y ou do not tell your hair to grow , your
heart to pump, your lungs to breathe, or your stomach to
digest. And yet your body handles all this and more on
autopilot. Y ou are much more than your conscious self .
Consider hunger . How do you know when you’re hungry?
You don’t necessarily have to see a cookie on the counter to
realize that it is time to eat. Appetite and hunger are
governed nonconsciously . Your body has a variety of
feedback loops that gradually alert you when it is time to
eat again and that track what is going on around you and
within you. Cravings can arise thanks to hormones and
chemicals circulating through your body . Suddenly , you’re
hungry even though you’re not quite sure what tipped you
oﬀ.
This is one of the most surprising insights about our
habits: you don’t need to be aware of the cue for a habit to
begin. Y ou can notice an opportunity and take action
without dedicating conscious attention to it. This is what
makes habits useful.
It’s also what makes them dangerous. As habits form,
your actions come under the direction of your automatic
and nonconscious mind. Y ou fall into old patterns before
you realize what’s happening. Unless someone points it out,
you may not notice that you cover your mouth with your
hand whenever you laugh, that you apologize before asking
a question, or that you have a habit of ﬁnishing other
people’s sentences. And the more you repeat these
patterns, the less likely you become to question what
you’re doing and why you’re doing it.
I once heard of a retail clerk who was instructed to cut
up empty gift cards after customers had used up the
balance on the card. One day , the clerk cashed out a few
customers in a row who purchased with gift cards. When
the next person walked up, the clerk swiped the customer’s
actual credit card, picked up the scissors, and then cut it in
half—entirely on autopilot—before looking up at the
stunned customer and realizing what had just happened.
Another woman I came across in my research was a
former preschool teacher who had switched to a corporate
job. Even though she was now working with adults, her old
habits would kick in and she kept asking coworkers if they
had washed their hands after going to the bathroom. I also
found the story of a man who had spent years working as a
lifeguard and would occasionally yell “ Walk!” whenever he
saw a child running.
Over time, the cues that spark our habits become so
common that they are essentially invisible: the treats on the
kitchen counter , the remote control next to the couch, the
phone in our pocket. Our responses to these cues are so
deeply encoded that it may feel like the urge to act comes
from nowhere. F or this reason, we must begin the process
of behavior change with awareness.
Before we can eﬀectively build new habits, we need to
get a handle on our current ones. This can be more
challenging than it sounds because once a habit is ﬁrmly
rooted in your life, it is mostly nonconscious and automatic.
If a habit remains mindless, you can’t expect to improve it.
As the psychologist Carl Jung said, “ Until you make the
unconscious conscious, it will direct your life and you will
call it fate.”
THE HABITS SCORECARD
The Japanese railway system is regarded as one of the best
in the world. If you ever ﬁnd yourself riding a train in
Tokyo, you’ll notice that the conductors have a peculiar
habit.
As each operator runs the train, they proceed through a
ritual of pointing at diﬀerent objects and calling out
commands. When the train approaches a signal, the
operator will point at it and say , “Signal is green.” As the
train pulls into and out of each station, the operator will
point at the speedometer and call out the exact speed.
When it’s time to leave, the operator will point at the
timetable and state the time. Out on the platform, other
employees are performing similar actions. Before each
train departs, staﬀ members will point along the edge of
the platform and declare, “ All clear!” Every detail is
identiﬁed, pointed at, and named aloud. *
This process, known as Pointing-and-Calling , is a safety
system designed to reduce mistakes. It seems silly , but it
works incredibly well. Pointing-and-Calling reduces errors
by up to 85 percent and cuts accidents by 30 percent. The
MTA subway system in New Y ork City adopted a modiﬁed
version that is “point-only ,” and “within two years of
implementation, incidents of incorrectly berthed subways
fell 57 percent.”
Pointing-and-Calling is so eﬀective because it raises the
level of awareness from a nonconscious habit to a more
conscious level. Because the train operators must use their
eyes, hands, mouth, and ears, they are more likely to notice
problems before something goes wrong.
My wife does something similar . Whenever we are
preparing to walk out the door for a trip, she verbally calls
out the most essential items in her packing list. “I’ve got
my keys. I’ve got my wallet. I’ve got my glasses. I’ve got my
husband.”
The more automatic a behavior becomes, the less likely
we are to consciously think about it. And when we’ve done
something a thousand times before, we begin to overlook
things. W e assume that the next time will be just like the
last. W e’re so used to doing what we’ve always done that
we don’t stop to question whether it’s the right thing to do
at all. Many of our failures in performance are largely
attributable to a lack of self -awareness.
One of our greatest challenges in changing habits is
maintaining awareness of what we are actually doing. This
helps explain why the consequences of bad habits can
sneak up on us. W e need a “point-and-call” system for our
personal lives. That’s the origin of the Habits Scorecard,
which is a simple exercise you can use to become more
aware of your behavior . To create your own, make a list of
your daily habits.
Here’s a sample of where your list might start:
Wake up
Turn oﬀ alarm
Check my phone
Go to the bathroom
Weigh myself
Take a shower
Brush my teeth
Floss my teeth
Put on deodorant
Hang up towel to dry
Get dressed
Make a cup of tea
. . . and so on.
Once you have a full list, look at each behavior , and ask
yourself , “Is this a good habit, a bad habit, or a neutral
habit?” If it is a good habit, write “+” next to it. If it is a
bad habit, write “–”. If it is a neutral habit, write “=”.
For example, the list above might look like this:
Wake up =
Turn oﬀ alarm =
Check my phone –
Go to the bathroom =
Weigh myself +
Take a shower +
Brush my teeth +
Floss my teeth +
Put on deodorant +
Hang up towel to dry =
Get dressed =
Make a cup of tea +
The marks you give to a particular habit will depend on
your situation and your goals. F or someone who is trying to
lose weight, eating a bagel with peanut butter every
morning might be a bad habit. F or someone who is trying
to bulk up and add muscle, the same behavior might be a
good habit. It all depends on what you’re working toward. *
Scoring your habits can be a bit more complex for
another reason as well. The labels “good habit” and “bad
habit” are slightly inaccurate. There are no good habits or
bad habits. There are only eﬀective habits. That is, eﬀective
at solving problems. All habits serve you in some way—
even the bad ones—which is why you repeat them. F or this
exercise, categorize your habits by how they will beneﬁt
you in the long run. Generally speaking, good habits will
have net positive outcomes. Bad habits have net negative
outcomes. Smoking a cigarette may reduce stress right
now (that’s how it’s serving you), but it’s not a healthy
long-term behavior .
If you’re still having trouble determining how to rate a
particular habit, here is a question I like to use: “Does this
behavior help me become the type of person I wish to be?
Does this habit cast a vote for or against my desired
identity?” Habits that reinforce your desired identity are
usually good. Habits that conﬂict with your desired identity
are usually bad.
As you create your Habits Scorecard, there is no need to
change anything at ﬁrst. The goal is to simply notice what
is actually going on. Observe your thoughts and actions
without judgment or internal criticism. Don’t blame
yourself for your faults. Don’t praise yourself for your
successes.
If you eat a chocolate bar every morning, acknowledge it,
almost as if you were watching someone else. Oh, how
interesting that they would do such a thing.  If you binge-
eat, simply notice that you are eating more calories than
you should. If you waste time online, notice that you are
spending your life in a way that you do not want to .
The ﬁrst step to changing bad habits is to be on the
lookout for them. If you feel like you need extra help, then
you can try P ointing-and-Calling in your own life. Say out
loud the action that you are thinking of taking and what the
outcome will be. If you want to cut back on your junk food
habit but notice yourself grabbing another cookie, say out
loud, “I’m about to eat this cookie, but I don’t need it.
Eating it will cause me to gain weight and hurt my health.”
Hearing your bad habits spoken aloud makes the
consequences seem more real. It adds weight to the action
rather than letting yourself mindlessly slip into an old
routine. This approach is useful even if you’re simply trying
to remember a task on your to-do list. Just saying out loud,
“Tomorrow , I need to go to the post oﬀice after lunch,”
increases the odds that you’ll actually do it. Y ou’re getting
yourself to acknowledge the need for action—and that can
make all the diﬀerence.
The process of behavior change always starts with
awareness. Strategies like P ointing-and-Calling and the
Habits Scorecard are focused on getting you to recognize
your habits and acknowledge the cues that trigger them,
which makes it possible to respond in a way that beneﬁts
you.
Chapter Summary
With enough practice, your brain will pick up on the
cues that predict certain outcomes without consciously
thinking about it.
Once our habits become automatic, we stop paying
attention to what we are doing.
The process of behavior change always starts with
awareness. Y ou need to be aware of your habits before
you can change them.
Pointing-and-Calling raises your level of awareness
from a nonconscious habit to a more conscious level by
verbalizing your actions.
The Habits Scorecard is a simple exercise you can use
to become more aware of your behavior .