I
5
The Best W ay to Start a New Habit
N 2001 , RESEARCHERS in Great Britain began working with
248 people to build better exercise habits over the course
of two weeks. The subjects were divided into three groups.
The ﬁrst group was the control group. They were simply
asked to track how often they exercised.
The second group was the “motivation” group. They
were asked not only to track their workouts but also to
read some material on the beneﬁts of exercise. The
researchers also explained to the group how exercise could
reduce the risk of coronary heart disease and improve
heart health.
Finally , there was the third group. These subjects
received the same presentation as the second group, which
ensured that they had equal levels of motivation. However ,
they were also asked to formulate a plan for when and
where they would exercise over the following week.
Speciﬁcally , each member of the third group completed the
following sentence: “During the next week, I will partake in
at least 20 minutes of vigorous exercise on [DA Y] at [TIME]
in [PLACE].”
In the ﬁrst and second groups, 35 to 38 percent of
people exercised at least once per week. (Interestingly , the
motivational presentation given to the second group
seemed to have no meaningful impact on behavior .) But 91
percent of the third group exercised at least once per week
—more than double the normal rate.
The sentence they ﬁlled out is what researchers refer to
as an implementation intention , which is a plan you make
beforehand about when and where to act. That is, how you
intend  to implement  a particular habit.
The cues that can trigger a habit come in a wide range of
forms—the feel of your phone buzzing in your pocket, the
smell of chocolate chip cookies, the sound of ambulance
sirens—but the two most common cues are time and
location. Implementation intentions leverage both of these
cues.
Broadly speaking, the format for creating an
implementation intention is:
“When situation X arises, I will perform response
Y.”
Hundreds of studies have shown that implementation
intentions are eﬀective for sticking to our goals, whether
it’s writing down the exact time and date of when you will
get a ﬂu shot or recording the time of your colonoscopy
appointment. They increase the odds that people will stick
with habits like recycling, studying, going to sleep early ,
and stopping smoking.
Researchers have even found that voter turnout
increases when people are forced to create implementation
intentions by answering questions like: “ What route are
you taking to the polling station? A t what time are you
planning to go? What bus will get you there?” Other
successful government programs have prompted citizens to
make a clear plan to send taxes in on time or provided
directions on when and where to pay late traﬀic bills.
The punch line is clear: people who make a speciﬁc plan
for when and where they will perform a new habit are more
likely to follow through. T oo many people try to change
their habits without these basic details ﬁgured out. W e tell
ourselves, “I’m going to eat healthier” or “I’m going to
write more,” but we never say when and where these
habits are going to happen. W e leave it up to chance and
hope that we will “just remember to do it” or feel motivated
at the right time. An implementation intention sweeps away
foggy notions like “I want to work out more” or “I want to
be more productive” or “I should vote” and transforms
them into a concrete plan of action.
Many people think they lack motivation when what they
really lack is clarity . It is not always obvious when and
where to take action. Some people spend their entire lives
waiting for the time to be right to make an improvement.
Once an implementation intention has been set, you
don’t have to wait for inspiration to strike. Do I write a
chapter today or not? Do I meditate this morning or at
lunch?  When the moment of action occurs, there is no need
to make a decision. Simply follow your predetermined plan.
The simple way to apply this strategy to your habits
is to ﬁll out this sentence:
I will [BEHA VIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCA TION].
Meditation. I will meditate for one minute at 7 a.m. in
my kitchen.
Studying. I will study Spanish for twenty minutes at 6
p.m. in my bedroom.
Exercise. I will exercise for one hour at 5 p.m. in my
local gym.
Marriage. I will make my partner a cup of tea at 8 a.m.
in the kitchen.
If you aren’t sure when to start your habit, try the ﬁrst
day of the week, month, or year . People are more likely to
take action at those times because hope is usually higher . If
we have hope, we have a reason to take action. A fresh
start feels motivating.
There is another beneﬁt to implementation intentions.
Being speciﬁc about what you want and how you will
achieve it helps you say no to things that derail progress,
distract your attention, and pull you oﬀ course. W e often
say yes to little requests because we are not clear enough
about what we need to be doing instead. When your
dreams are vague, it’s easy to rationalize little exceptions
all day long and never get around to the speciﬁc things you
need to do to succeed.
Give your habits a time and a space to live in the world.
The goal is to make the time and location so obvious that,
with enough repetition, you get an urge to do the right
thing at the right time, even if you can’t say why . As the
writer Jason Zweig noted, “Obviously you’re never going to
just work out without conscious thought. But like a dog
salivating at a bell, maybe you start to get antsy around the
time of day you normally work out.”
There are many ways to use implementation intentions in
your life and work. My favorite approach is one I learned
from Stanford professor BJ F ogg and it is a strategy I refer
to as habit stacking .
HABIT ST ACKING: A SIMPLE PLAN TO O VERHA UL YOUR
HABITS
The French philosopher Denis Diderot lived nearly his
entire life in poverty , but that all changed one day in 1765.
Diderot’s daughter was about to be married and he could
not aﬀord to pay for the wedding. Despite his lack of
wealth, Diderot was well known for his role as the co-
founder and writer of Encyclopédie , one of the most
comprehensive encyclopedias of the time. When Catherine
the Great, the Empress of Russia, heard of Diderot’s
ﬁnancial troubles, her heart went out to him. She was a
book lover and greatly enjoyed his encyclopedia. She
oﬀered to buy Diderot’s personal library for £1,000—more
than $150,000 today .* Suddenly , Diderot had money to
spare. W ith his new wealth, he not only paid for the
wedding but also acquired a scarlet robe for himself .
Diderot’s scarlet robe was beautiful. So beautiful, in fact,
that he immediately noticed how out of place it seemed
when surrounded by his more common possessions. He
wrote that there was “ no more coordination, no more unity ,
no more beauty” between his elegant robe and the rest of
his stuﬀ .
Diderot soon felt the urge to upgrade his possessions. He
replaced his rug with one from Damascus. He decorated his
home with expensive sculptures. He bought a mirror to
place above the mantel, and a better kitchen table. He
tossed aside his old straw chair for a leather one. Like
falling dominoes, one purchase led to the next.
Diderot’s behavior is not uncommon. In fact, the
tendency for one purchase to lead to another one has a
name: the Diderot Eﬀect. The Diderot Eﬀect states that
obtaining a new possession often creates a spiral of
consumption that leads to additional purchases.
You can spot this pattern everywhere. Y ou buy a dress
and have to get new shoes and earrings to match. Y ou buy
a couch and suddenly question the layout of your entire
living room. Y ou buy a toy for your child and soon ﬁnd
yourself purchasing all of the accessories that go with it.
It’s a chain reaction of purchases.
Many human behaviors follow this cycle. Y ou often
decide what to do next based on what you have just
ﬁnished doing. Going to the bathroom leads to washing and
drying your hands, which reminds you that you need to put
the dirty towels in the laundry , so you add laundry
detergent to the shopping list, and so on. No behavior
happens in isolation. Each action becomes a cue that
triggers the next behavior .
Why is this important?
When it comes to building new habits, you can use the
connectedness of behavior to your advantage. One of the
best ways to build a new habit is to identify a current habit
you already do each day and then stack your new behavior
on top. This is called habit stacking .
Habit stacking is a special form of an implementation
intention. R ather than pairing your new habit with a
particular time and location, you pair it with a current
habit. This method, which was created by BJ F ogg as part
of his Tiny Habits program, can be used to design an
obvious cue for nearly any habit. *
The habit stacking formula is:
“After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].”
For example:
Meditation. A fter I pour my cup of coﬀee each
morning, I will meditate for one minute.
Exercise. A fter I take oﬀ my work shoes, I will
immediately change into my workout clothes.
Gratitude. A fter I sit down to dinner , I will say one
thing I’m grateful for that happened today .
Marriage. A fter I get into bed at night, I will give my
partner a kiss.
Safety . After I put on my running shoes, I will text a
friend or family member where I am running and how
long it will take.
The key is to tie your desired behavior into something
you already do each day . Once you have mastered this basic
structure, you can begin to create larger stacks by chaining
small habits together . This allows you to take advantage of
the natural momentum that comes from one behavior
leading into the next—a positive version of the Diderot
Eﬀect.
HABIT ST ACKING
FIGURE 7:  Habit stacking incr eases the lik elihood that you’ll stick
with a habit by stacking your new behavior on top of an old one.
This pr ocess can be r epeated to chain numer ous habits
together, each one acting as the cue for the ne xt.
Your morning routine habit stack might look like this:
1. After I pour my morning cup of coﬀee, I will meditate
for sixty seconds.
2. After I meditate for sixty seconds, I will write my to-do
list for the day .
3. After I write my to-do list for the day , I will
immediately begin my ﬁrst task.
Or, consider this habit stack in the evening:
1. After I ﬁnish eating dinner , I will put my plate directly
into the dishwasher .
2. After I put my dishes away , I will immediately wipe
down the counter .
3. After I wipe down the counter , I will set out my coﬀee
mug for tomorrow morning.
You can also insert new behaviors into the middle of your
current routines. F or example, you may already have a
morning routine that looks like this: W ake up > Make my
bed > T ake a shower . Let’s say you want to develop the
habit of reading more each night. Y ou can expand your
habit stack and try something like: W ake up > Make my
bed > Place a book on my pillow  > Take a shower . Now ,
when you climb into bed each night, a book will be sitting
there waiting for you to enjoy .
Overall, habit stacking allows you to create a set of
simple rules that guide your future behavior . It’s like you
always have a game plan for which action should come
next. Once you get comfortable with this approach, you can
develop general habit stacks to guide you whenever the
situation is appropriate:
Exercise. When I see a set of stairs, I will take them
instead of using the elevator .
Social skills. When I walk into a party , I will introduce
myself to someone I don’t know yet.
Finances. When I want to buy something over $100, I
will wait twenty-four hours before purchasing.
Healthy eating. When I serve myself a meal, I will
always put veggies on my plate ﬁrst.
Minimalism. When I buy a new item, I will give
something away . (“One in, one out.”)
Mood. When the phone rings, I will take one deep
breath and smile before answering.
Forgetfulness. When I leave a public place, I will check
the table and chairs to make sure I don’t leave
anything behind.
No matter how you use this strategy , the secret to
creating a successful habit stack is selecting the right cue
to kick things oﬀ . Unlike an implementation intention,
which speciﬁcally states the time and location for a given
behavior , habit stacking implicitly has the time and location
built into it. When and where you choose to insert a habit
into your daily routine can make a big diﬀerence. If you’re
trying to add meditation into your morning routine but
mornings are chaotic and your kids keep running into the
room, then that may be the wrong place and time. Consider
when you are most likely to be successful. Don’t ask
yourself to do a habit when you’re likely to be occupied
with something else.
Your cue should also have the same frequency as your
desired habit. If you want to do a habit every day , but you
stack it on top of a habit that only happens on Mondays,
that’s not a good choice.
One way to ﬁnd the right trigger for your habit stack is
by brainstorming a list of your current habits. Y ou can use
your Habits Scorecard from the last chapter as a starting
point. Alternatively , you can create a list with two columns.
In the ﬁrst column, write down the habits you do each day
without fail. *
For example:
Get out of bed.
Take a shower .
Brush your teeth.
Get dressed.
Brew a cup of coﬀee.
Eat breakfast.
Take the kids to school.
Start the work day .
Eat lunch.
End the work day .
Change out of work clothes.
Sit down for dinner .
Turn oﬀ the lights.
Get into bed.
Your list can be much longer , but you get the idea. In the
second column, write down all of the things that happen to
you each day without fail. F or example:
The sun rises.
You get a text message.
The song you are listening to ends.
The sun sets.
Armed with these two lists, you can begin searching for
the best place to layer your new habit into your lifestyle.
Habit stacking works best when the cue is highly speciﬁc
and immediately actionable. Many people select cues that
are too vague. I made this mistake myself . When I wanted
to start a push-up habit, my habit stack was “ When I take a
break for lunch, I will do ten push-ups.” A t ﬁrst glance, this
sounded reasonable. But soon, I realized the trigger was
unclear . Would I do my push-ups before I ate lunch? A fter I
ate lunch? Where would I do them? A fter a few inconsistent
days, I changed my habit stack to: “ When I close my laptop
for lunch, I will do ten push-ups next to my desk.”
Ambiguity gone.
Habits like “read more” or “eat better” are worthy
causes, but these goals do not provide instruction on how
and when to act. Be speciﬁc and clear: A fter I close the
door. After I brush my teeth. A fter I sit down at the table.
The speciﬁcity is important. The more tightly bound your
new habit is to a speciﬁc cue, the better the odds are that
you will notice when the time comes to act.
The 1st Law of Behavior Change is to make it obvious.
Strategies like implementation intentions and habit
stacking are among the most practical ways to create
obvious cues for your habits and design a clear plan for
when and where to take action.
Chapter Summary
The 1st Law of Behavior Change is make it obvious .
The two most common cues are time and location.
Creating an implementation intention is a strategy you
can use to pair a new habit with a speciﬁc time and
location.
The implementation intention formula is: I will
[BEHA VIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCA TION].
Habit stacking is a strategy you can use to pair a new
habit with a current habit.
The habit stacking formula is: A fter [CURRENT
HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].