6
Motivation Is Over rated; Envir onment Of ten Matters
More
ANNE THORNDIKE , A primary care physician at Massachusetts
General Hospital in Boston, had a crazy idea. She believed
she could improve the eating habits of thousands of
hospital staﬀ and visitors without changing their willpower
or motivation in the slightest way . In fact, she didn’t plan
on talking to them at all.
Thorndike and her colleagues designed a six -month study
to alter the “choice architecture” of the hospital cafeteria.
They started by changing how drinks were arranged in the
room. Originally , the refrigerators located next to the cash
registers in the cafeteria were ﬁlled with only soda. The
researchers added water as an option to each one.
Additionally , they placed baskets of bottled water next to
the food stations throughout the room. Soda was still in the
primary refrigerators, but water was now available at all
drink locations.
Over the next three months, the number of soda sales at
the hospital dropped by 11.4 percent. Meanwhile, sales of
bottled water increased by 25.8 percent. They made similar
adjustments—and saw similar results—with the food in the
cafeteria. Nobody had said a word to anyone eating there.
AFTER BEFORE
FIGURE 8:  Here is a r epresentation of what the cafeteria look ed
like befor e the envir onment design changes wer e made (lef t)
and af ter (right). The shaded bo xes indicate ar eas wher e bottled
water was available in each instance. Because the amount of
water in the envir onment was incr eased, behavior shif ted
naturally and without additional motivation.
People often choose products not because of what  they
are, but because of where  they are. If I walk into the
kitchen and see a plate of cookies on the counter , I’ll pick
up half a dozen and start eating, even if I hadn’t been
thinking about them beforehand and didn’t necessarily feel
hungry . If the communal table at the oﬀice is always ﬁlled
with doughnuts and bagels, it’s going to be hard not to
grab one every now and then. Y our habits change
depending on the room you are in and the cues in front of
you.
Environment is the invisible hand that shapes human
behavior . Despite our unique personalities, certain
behaviors tend to arise again and again under certain
environmental conditions. In church, people tend to talk in
whispers. On a dark street, people act wary and guarded.
In this way , the most common form of change is not
internal, but external: we are changed by the world around
us. Every habit is context dependent.
In 1936, psychologist K urt Lewin wrote a simple
equation that makes a powerful statement: Behavior is a
function of the P erson in their Environment, or B = f (P,E).
It didn’t take long for Lewin’s Equation to be tested in
business. In 1952, the economist Hawkins Stern described
a phenomenon he called Suggestion Impulse Buying , which
“is triggered when a shopper sees a product for the ﬁrst
time and visualizes a need for it.” In other words,
customers will occasionally buy products not because they
want  them but because of how they are presented  to them.
For example, items at eye level tend to be purchased
more than those down near the ﬂoor . For this reason, you’ll
ﬁnd expensive brand names featured in easy-to-reach
locations on store shelves because they drive the most
proﬁt, while cheaper alternatives are tucked away in
harder-to-reach spots. The same goes for end caps, which
are the units at the end of aisles. End caps are
moneymaking machines for retailers because they are
obvious locations that encounter a lot of foot traﬀic. F or
example, 45 percent of Coca-Cola sales come speciﬁcally
from end-of -the-aisle racks.
The more obviously available a product or service is, the
more likely you are to try it. People drink Bud Light
because it is in every bar and visit Starbucks because it is
on every corner . We like to think that we are in control. If
we choose water over soda, we assume it is because we
wanted to do so . The truth, however , is that many of the
actions we take each day are shaped not by purposeful
drive and choice but by the most obvious option.
Every living being has its own methods for sensing and
understanding the world. Eagles have remarkable long-
distance vision. Snakes can smell by “tasting the air” with
their highly sensitive tongues. Sharks can detect small
amounts of electricity and vibrations in the water caused by
nearby ﬁsh. Even bacteria have chemoreceptors—tiny
sensory cells that allow them to detect toxic chemicals in
their environment.
In humans, perception is directed by the sensory nervous
system. W e perceive the world through sight, sound, smell,
touch, and taste. But we also have other ways of sensing
stimuli. Some are conscious, but many are nonconscious.
For instance, you can “notice” when the temperature drops
before a storm, or when the pain in your gut rises during a
stomachache, or when you fall oﬀ balance while walking on
rocky ground. Receptors in your body pick up on a wide
range of internal stimuli, such as the amount of salt in your
blood or the need to drink when thirsty .
The most powerful of all human sensory abilities,
however , is vision. The human body has about eleven
million sensory receptors. Approximately ten million of
those are dedicated to sight. Some experts estimate that
half of the brain’s resources are used on vision. Given that
we are more dependent on vision than on any other sense,
it should come as no surprise that visual cues are the
greatest catalyst of our behavior . For this reason, a small
change in what you see can lead to a big shift in what you
do. As a result, you can imagine how important it is to live
and work in environments that are ﬁlled with productive
cues and devoid of unproductive ones.
Thankfully , there is good news in this respect. Y ou don’t
have to be the victim of your environment. Y ou can also be
the architect of it.
HOW TO DESIGN Y OUR ENVIRONMENT FOR SUCCES S
During the energy crisis and oil embargo of the 1970s,
Dutch researchers began to pay close attention to the
country’s energy usage. In one suburb near Amsterdam,
they found that some homeowners used 30 percent less
energy than their neighbors—despite the homes being of
similar size and getting electricity for the same price.
It turned out the houses in this neighborhood were
nearly identical except for one feature: the location of the
electrical meter . Some had one in the basement. Others
had the electrical meter upstairs in the main hallway . As
you may guess, the homes with the meters located in the
main hallway used less electricity . When their energy use
was obvious and easy to track, people changed their
behavior .
Every habit is initiated by a cue, and we are more likely
to notice cues that stand out. Unfortunately , the
environments where we live and work often make it easy
not to do certain actions because there is no obvious cue to
trigger the behavior . It’s easy not to practice the guitar
when it’s tucked away in the closet. It’s easy not to read a
book when the bookshelf is in the corner of the guest room.
It’s easy not to take your vitamins when they are out of
sight in the pantry . When the cues that spark a habit are
subtle or hidden, they are easy to ignore.
By comparison, creating obvious visual cues can draw
your attention toward a desired habit. In the early 1990s,
the cleaning staﬀ at Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam
installed a small sticker that looked like a ﬂy near the
center of each urinal. Apparently , when men stepped up to
the urinals, they aimed for what they thought was a bug.
The stickers improved their aim and signiﬁcantly reduced
“spillage” around the urinals. Further analysis determined
that the stickers cut bathroom cleaning costs by 8 percent
per year .
I’ve experienced the power of obvious cues in my own
life. I used to buy apples from the store, put them in the
crisper in the bottom of the refrigerator , and forget all
about them. By the time I remembered, the apples would
have gone bad. I never saw them, so I never ate them.
Eventually , I took my own advice and redesigned my
environment. I bought a large display bowl and placed it in
the middle of the kitchen counter . The next time I bought
apples, that was where they went—out in the open where I
could see them. Almost like magic, I began eating a few
apples each day simply because they were obvious rather
than out of sight.
Here are a few ways you can redesign your environment
and make the cues for your preferred habits more obvious:
If you want to remember to take your medication each
night, put your pill bottle directly next to the faucet on
the bathroom counter .
If you want to practice guitar more frequently , place
your guitar stand in the middle of the living room.
If you want to remember to send more thank -you notes,
keep a stack of stationery on your desk.
If you want to drink more water , ﬁll up a few water
bottles each morning and place them in common
locations around the house.
If you want to make a habit a big part of your life, make
the cue a big part of your environment. The most persistent
behaviors usually have multiple cues. Consider how many
diﬀerent ways a smoker could be prompted to pull out a
cigarette: driving in the car , seeing a friend smoke, feeling
stressed at work, and so on.
The same strategy can be employed for good habits. By
sprinkling triggers throughout your surroundings, you
increase the odds that you’ll think about your habit
throughout the day . Make sure the best choice is the most
obvious one. Making a better decision is easy and natural
when the cues for good habits are right in front of you.
Environment design is powerful not only because it
inﬂuences how we engage with the world but also because
we rarely do it. Most people live in a world others have
created for them. But you can alter the spaces where you
live and work to increase your exposure to positive cues
and reduce your exposure to negative ones. Environment
design allows you to take back control and become the
architect of your life. Be the designer of your world and not
merely the consumer of it.
THE CONTEXT IS THE CUE
The cues that trigger a habit can start out very speciﬁc, but
over time your habits become associated not with a single
trigger but with the entire context  surrounding the
behavior .
For example, many people drink more in social situations
than they would ever drink alone. The trigger is rarely a
single cue, but rather the whole situation: watching your
friends order drinks, hearing the music at the bar , seeing
the beers on tap.
We mentally assign our habits to the locations in which
they occur: the home, the oﬀice, the gym. Each location
develops a connection to certain habits and routines. Y ou
establish a particular relationship with the objects on your
desk, the items on your kitchen counter , the things in your
bedroom.
Our behavior is not deﬁned by the objects in the
environment but by our relationship to them. In fact, this is
a useful way to think about the inﬂuence of the
environment on your behavior . Stop thinking about your
environment as ﬁlled with objects. Start thinking about it
as ﬁlled with relationships. Think in terms of how you
interact with the spaces around you. F or one person, her
couch is the place where she reads for an hour each night.
For someone else, the couch is where he watches television
and eats a bowl of ice cream after work. Diﬀerent people
can have diﬀerent memories—and thus diﬀerent habits—
associated with the same place.
The good news? Y ou can train yourself to link a
particular habit with a particular context.
In one study , scientists instructed insomniacs to get into
bed only when they were tired. If they couldn’t fall asleep,
they were told to sit in a diﬀerent room until they became
sleepy . Over time, subjects began to associate the context
of their bed with the action of sleeping, and it became
easier to quickly fall asleep when they climbed in bed.
Their brains learned that sleeping—not browsing on their
phones, not watching television, not staring at the clock—
was the only action that happened in that room.
The power of context also reveals an important strategy:
habits can be easier to change in a new environment. It
helps to escape the subtle triggers and cues that nudge you
toward your current habits. Go to a new place—a diﬀerent
coﬀee shop, a bench in the park, a corner of your room you
seldom use—and create a new routine there.
It is easier to associate a new habit with a new context
than to build a new habit in the face of competing cues. It
can be diﬀicult to go to bed early if you watch television in
your bedroom each night. It can be hard to study in the
living room without getting distracted if that’s where you
always play video games. But when you step outside your
normal environment, you leave your behavioral biases
behind. You aren’t battling old environmental cues, which
allows new habits to form without interruption.
Want to think more creatively? Move to a bigger room, a
rooftop patio, or a building with expansive architecture.
Take a break from the space where you do your daily work,
which is also linked to your current thought patterns.
Trying to eat healthier? It is likely that you shop on
autopilot at your regular supermarket. Try a new grocery
store. Y ou may ﬁnd it easier to avoid unhealthy food when
your brain doesn’t automatically know where it is located in
the store.
When you can’t manage to get to an entirely new
environment, redeﬁne or rearrange your current one.
Create a separate space for work, study , exercise,
entertainment, and cooking. The mantra I ﬁnd useful is
“One space, one use.”
When I started my career as an entrepreneur , I would
often work from my couch or at the kitchen table. In the
evenings, I found it very diﬀicult to stop working. There
was no clear division between the end of work time and the
beginning of personal time. W as the kitchen table my oﬀice
or the space where I ate meals? W as the couch where I
relaxed or where I sent emails? Everything happened in the
same place.
A few years later , I could ﬁnally aﬀord to move to a home
with a separate room for my oﬀice. Suddenly , work was
something that happened “in here” and personal life was
something that happened “out there.” It was easier for me
to turn oﬀ the professional side of my brain when there was
a clear dividing line between work life and home life. Each
room had one primary use. The kitchen was for cooking.
The oﬀice was for working.
Whenever possible, avoid mixing the context of one habit
with another . When you start mixing contexts, you’ll start
mixing habits—and the easier ones will usually win out.
This is one reason why the versatility of modern technology
is both a strength and a weakness. Y ou can use your phone
for all sorts of tasks, which makes it a powerful device. But
when you can use your phone to do nearly anything, it
becomes hard to associate it with one task. Y ou want to be
productive, but you’re also conditioned to browse social
media, check email, and play video games whenever you
open your phone. It’s a mishmash of cues.
You may be thinking, “ You don’t understand. I live in
New Y ork City . My apartment is the size of a smartphone. I
need each room to play multiple roles.” F air enough. If your
space is limited, divide your room into activity zones: a
chair for reading, a desk for writing, a table for eating. Y ou
can do the same with your digital spaces. I know a writer
who uses his computer only for writing, his tablet only for
reading, and his phone only for social media and texting.
Every habit should have a home.
If you can manage to stick with this strategy , each
context will become associated with a particular habit and
mode of thought. Habits thrive under predictable
circumstances like these. F ocus comes automatically when
you are sitting at your work desk. Relaxation is easier when
you are in a space designed for that purpose. Sleep comes
quickly when it is the only thing that happens in your
bedroom. If you want behaviors that are stable and
predictable, you need an environment that is stable and
predictable.
A stable environment where everything has a place and a
purpose is an environment where habits can easily form.
Chapter Summary
Small changes in context can lead to large changes in
behavior over time.
Every habit is initiated by a cue. W e are more likely to
notice cues that stand out.
Make the cues of good habits obvious in your
environment.
Gradually , your habits become associated not with a
single trigger but with the entire context surrounding
the behavior . The context becomes the cue.
It is easier to build new habits in a new environment
because you are not ﬁghting against old cues.