I
7
The Secr et to Self -Contr ol
N 1971 , as the V ietnam W ar was heading into its sixteenth
year, congressmen Robert Steele from Connecticut and
Morgan Murphy from Illinois made a discovery that
stunned the American public. While visiting the troops,
they had learned that over 15 percent of U .S. soldiers
stationed there were heroin addicts. Follow-up research
revealed that 35 percent of service members in V ietnam
had tried heroin and as many as 20 percent were addicted
—the problem was even worse than they had initially
thought.
The discovery led to a ﬂurry of activity in W ashington,
including the creation of the Special Action Oﬀice of Drug
Abuse Prevention under President Nixon to promote
prevention and rehabilitation and to track addicted service
members when they returned home.
Lee Robins was one of the researchers in charge. In a
ﬁnding that completely upended the accepted beliefs about
addiction, Robins found that when soldiers who had been
heroin users returned home, only 5 percent of them
became re-addicted within a year , and just 12 percent
relapsed within three years. In other words, approximately
nine out of ten soldiers who used heroin in V ietnam
eliminated their addiction nearly overnight.
This ﬁnding contradicted the prevailing view at the time,
which considered heroin addiction to be a permanent and
irreversible condition. Instead, Robins revealed that
addictions could spontaneously dissolve if there was a
radical change in the environment. In V ietnam, soldiers
spent all day surrounded by cues triggering heroin use: it
was easy to access, they were engulfed by the constant
stress of war , they built friendships with fellow soldiers
who were also heroin users, and they were thousands of
miles from home. Once a soldier returned to the United
States, though, he found himself in an environment devoid
of those triggers. When the context changed, so did the
habit.
Compare this situation to that of a typical drug user .
Someone becomes addicted at home or with friends, goes
to a clinic to get clean—which is devoid of all the
environmental stimuli that prompt their habit—then
returns to their old neighborhood with all of their previous
cues that caused them to get addicted in the ﬁrst place. It’s
no wonder that usually you see numbers that are the exact
opposite of those in the V ietnam study . Typically , 90
percent of heroin users become re-addicted once they
return home from rehab.
The V ietnam studies ran counter to many of our cultural
beliefs about bad habits because it challenged the
conventional association of unhealthy behavior as a moral
weakness. If you’re overweight, a smoker , or an addict,
you’ve been told your entire life that it is because you lack
self-control—maybe even that you’re a bad person. The idea
that a little bit of discipline would solve all our problems is
deeply embedded in our culture.
Recent research, however , shows something diﬀerent.
When scientists analyze people who appear to have
tremendous self -control, it turns out those individuals
aren’t all that diﬀerent from those who are struggling.
Instead, “ disciplined” people are better at structuring their
lives in a way that does not require  heroic willpower and
self-control. In other words, they spend less time in
tempting situations.
The people with the best self -control are typically the
ones who need to use it the least. It’s easier to practice
self-restraint when you don’t have to use it very often. So,
yes, perseverance, grit, and willpower are essential to
success, but the way to improve these qualities is not by
wishing you were a more disciplined person, but by
creating a more disciplined environment.
This counterintuitive idea makes even more sense once
you understand what happens when a habit is formed in
the brain. A habit that has been encoded in the mind is
ready to be used whenever the relevant situation arises.
When P atty Olwell, a therapist from Austin, T exas, started
smoking, she would often light up while riding horses with
a friend. Eventually , she quit smoking and avoided it for
years. She had also stopped riding. Decades later , she
hopped on a horse again and found herself craving a
cigarette for the ﬁrst time in forever . The cues were still
internalized; she just hadn’t been exposed to them in a long
time.
Once a habit has been encoded, the urge to act follows
whenever the environmental cues reappear . This is one
reason behavior change techniques can backﬁre. Shaming
obese people with weight-loss presentations can make
them feel stressed, and as a result many people return to
their favorite coping strategy: overeating. Showing pictures
of blackened lungs to smokers leads to higher levels of
anxiety , which drives many people to reach for a cigarette.
If you’re not careful about cues, you can cause the very
behavior you want to stop.
Bad habits are autocatalytic: the process feeds itself .
They foster the feelings they try to numb. Y ou feel bad, so
you eat junk food. Because you eat junk food, you feel bad.
Watching television makes you feel sluggish, so you watch
more television because you don’t have the energy to do
anything else. W orrying about your health makes you feel
anxious, which causes you to smoke to ease your anxiety ,
which makes your health even worse and soon you’re
feeling more anxious. It’s a downward spiral, a runaway
train of bad habits.
Researchers refer to this phenomenon as “cue-induced
wanting”: an external trigger causes a compulsive craving
to repeat a bad habit. Once you notice  something, you
begin to want  it. This process is happening all the time—
often without us realizing it. Scientists have found that
showing addicts a picture of cocaine for just thirty-three
milliseconds stimulates the reward pathway in the brain
and sparks desire. This speed is too fast for the brain to
consciously register—the addicts couldn’t even tell you
what they had seen—but they craved the drug all the same.
Here’s the punch line: Y ou can break a habit, but you’re
unlikely to forget it. Once the mental grooves of habit have
been carved into your brain, they are nearly impossible to
remove entirely—even if they go unused for quite a while.
And that means that simply resisting temptation is an
ineﬀective strategy . It is hard to maintain a Zen attitude in
a life ﬁlled with interruptions. It takes too much energy . In
the short-run, you can choose to overpower temptation. In
the long-run, we become a product of the environment that
we live in. T o put it bluntly , I have never seen someone
consistently stick to positive habits in a negative
environment.
A more reliable approach is to cut bad habits oﬀ at the
source. One of the most practical ways to eliminate a bad
habit is to reduce exposure to the cue that causes it.
If you can’t seem to get any work done, leave your
phone in another room for a few hours.
If you’re continually feeling like you’re not enough,
stop following social media accounts that trigger
jealousy and envy .
If you’re wasting too much time watching television,
move the TV out of the bedroom.
If you’re spending too much money on electronics, quit
reading reviews of the latest tech gear .
If you’re playing too many video games, unplug the
console and put it in a closet after each use.
This practice is an inversion of the 1st Law of Behavior
Change. R ather than make it obvious , you can make it
invisible . I’m often surprised by how eﬀective simple
changes like these can be. Remove a single cue and the
entire habit often fades away .
Self-control is a short-term strategy , not a long-term one.
You may be able to resist temptation once or twice, but it’s
unlikely you can muster the willpower to override your
desires every time. Instead of summoning a new dose of
willpower whenever you want to do the right thing, your
energy would be better spent optimizing your environment.
This is the secret to self -control. Make the cues of your
good habits obvious and the cues of your bad habits
invisible.
Chapter Summary
The inversion of the 1st Law of Behavior Change is
make it invisible .
Once a habit is formed, it is unlikely to be forgotten.
People with high self -control tend to spend less time in
tempting situations. It’s easier to avoid temptation than
resist it.
One of the most practical ways to eliminate a bad habit
is to reduce exposure to the cue that causes it.
Self-control is a short-term strategy , not a long-term
one.
HOW TO CREA TE A GOOD HABIT
The 1st Law : Make It Obvious
1.1: Fill out the Habits Scor ecard. Write down your cur rent habits to become
awar e of them.
1.2: Use implementation intentions : “I will [BEHA VIOR] at [TIME] in
[LOCATION].”
1.3: Use habit stacking : “After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].”
1.4: Design your envir onment. Mak e the cues of good habits obvious and
visible.
The 2nd Law : Make It Attractive
The 3rd Law : Make It Easy
The 4th Law : Make It Satisfying
HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT
Inversion of the 1st Law : Make It Invisible
1.5: Reduce e xposur e. Remove the cues of your bad habits fr om your
envir onment.
Inversion of the 2nd Law : Make It Unattractive
Inversion of the 3rd Law : Make It Diﬃcult
Inversion of the 4th Law : Make It Unsatisfying
You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at:
atomichabits.com/cheatsheet