I
8
How to Mak e a Habit Ir resistible
N THE 1940S , a Dutch scientist named Niko Tinbergen
performed a series of experiments that transformed our
understanding of what motivates us. Tinbergen—who
eventually won a Nobel Prize for his work—was
investigating herring gulls, the gray and white birds often
seen ﬂying along the seashores of North America.
Adult herring gulls have a small red dot on their beak,
and Tinbergen noticed that newly hatched chicks would
peck this spot whenever they wanted food. T o begin one
experiment, he created a collection of fake cardboard
beaks, just a head without a body . When the parents had
ﬂown away , he went over to the nest and oﬀered these
dummy beaks to the chicks. The beaks were obvious fakes,
and he assumed the baby birds would reject them
altogether .
However , when the tiny gulls saw the red spot on the
cardboard beak, they pecked away just as if it were
attached to their own mother . They had a clear preference
for those red spots—as if they had been genetically
programmed at birth. Soon Tinbergen discovered that the
bigger the red spot, the faster the chicks pecked.
Eventually , he created a beak with three large red dots on
it. When he placed it over the nest, the baby birds went
crazy with delight. They pecked at the little red patches as
if it was the greatest beak they had ever seen.
Tinbergen and his colleagues discovered similar behavior
in other animals. F or example, the greylag goose is a
ground-nesting bird. Occasionally , as the mother moves
around on the nest, one of the eggs will roll out and settle
on the grass nearby . Whenever this happens, the goose will
waddle over to the egg and use its beak and neck to pull it
back into the nest.
Tinbergen discovered that the goose will pull any nearby
round object, such as a billiard ball or a lightbulb, back into
the nest. The bigger the object, the greater their response.
One goose even made a tremendous eﬀort to roll a
volleyball back and sit on top. Like the baby gulls
automatically pecking at red dots, the greylag goose was
following an instinctive rule: When I see a round object
nearby , I must roll it back into the nest. The bigger the
round object, the harder I should try to get it.
It’s like the brain of each animal is preloaded with
certain rules for behavior , and when it comes across an
exaggerated version of that rule, it lights up like a
Christmas tree. Scientists refer to these exaggerated cues
as supernormal stimuli . A supernormal stimulus is a
heightened version of reality—like a beak with three red
dots or an egg the size of a volleyball—and it elicits a
stronger response than usual.
Humans are also prone to fall for exaggerated versions
of reality . Junk food, for example, drives our reward
systems into a frenzy . After spending hundreds of
thousands of years hunting and foraging for food in the
wild, the human brain has evolved to place a high value on
salt, sugar , and fat. Such foods are often calorie-dense and
they were quite rare when our ancient ancestors were
roaming the savannah. When you don’t know where your
next meal is coming from, eating as much as possible is an
excellent strategy for survival.
Today, however , we live in a calorie-rich environment.
Food is abundant, but your brain continues to crave it like
it is scarce. Placing a high value on salt, sugar , and fat is no
longer advantageous to our health, but the craving persists
because the brain’s reward centers have not changed for
approximately ﬁfty thousand years. The modern food
industry relies on stretching our P aleolithic instincts
beyond their evolutionary purpose.
A primary goal of food science is to create products that
are more attractive to consumers. Nearly every food in a
bag, box, or jar has been enhanced in some way , if only
with additional ﬂavoring. Companies spend millions of
dollars to discover the most satisfying level of crunch in a
potato chip or the perfect amount of ﬁzz in a soda. Entire
departments are dedicated to optimizing how a product
feels in your mouth—a quality known as orosensation .
French fries, for example, are a potent combination—
golden brown and crunchy on the outside, light and smooth
on the inside.
Other processed foods enhance dynamic contrast , which
refers to items with a combination of sensations, like
crunchy and creamy . Imagine the gooeyness of melted
cheese on top of a crispy pizza crust, or the crunch of an
Oreo cookie combined with its smooth center . With natural,
unprocessed foods, you tend to experience the same
sensations over and over— how’s that seventeenth bite of
kale taste?  After a few minutes, your brain loses interest
and you begin to feel full. But foods that are high in
dynamic contrast keep the experience novel and
interesting, encouraging you to eat more.
Ultimately , such strategies enable food scientists to ﬁnd
the “bliss point” for each product—the precise combination
of salt, sugar , and fat that excites your brain and keeps you
coming back for more. The result, of course, is that you
overeat because hyperpalatable foods are more attractive
to the human brain. As Stephan Guyenet, a neuroscientist
who specializes in eating behavior and obesity , says, “ We’ve
gotten too good at pushing our own buttons.”
The modern food industry , and the overeating habits it
has spawned, is just one example of the 2nd Law of
Behavior Change: Make it attractive.  The more attractive
an opportunity is, the more likely it is to become habit-
forming.
Look around. Society is ﬁlled with highly engineered
versions of reality that are more attractive than the world
our ancestors evolved in. Stores feature mannequins with
exaggerated hips and breasts to sell clothes. Social media
delivers more “likes” and praise in a few minutes than we
could ever get in the oﬀice or at home. Online porn splices
together stimulating scenes at a rate that would be
impossible to replicate in real life. Advertisements are
created with a combination of ideal lighting, professional
makeup, and Photoshopped edits—even the model doesn’t
look like the person in the ﬁnal image. These are the
supernormal stimuli of our modern world. They exaggerate
features that are naturally attractive to us, and our
instincts go wild as a result, driving us into excessive
shopping habits, social media habits, porn habits, eating
habits, and many others.
If history serves as a guide, the opportunities of the
future will be more attractive than those of today . The
trend is for rewards to become more concentrated and
stimuli to become more enticing. Junk food is a more
concentrated form of calories than natural foods. Hard
liquor is a more concentrated form of alcohol than beer .
Video games are a more concentrated form of play than
board games. Compared to nature, these pleasure-packed
experiences are hard to resist. W e have the brains of our
ancestors but temptations they never had to face.
If you want to increase the odds that a behavior will
occur , then you need to make it attractive. Throughout our
discussion of the 2nd Law , our goal is to learn how to make
our habits irresistible. While it is not possible to transform
every habit into a supernormal stimulus, we can make any
habit more enticing. T o do this, we must start by
understanding what a craving is and how it works.
We begin by examining a biological signature that all
habits share—the dopamine spike.
THE DOP AMINE-DRIVEN FEEDBACK L OOP
Scientists can track the precise moment a craving occurs
by measuring a neurotransmitter called dopamine. * The
importance of dopamine became apparent in 1954 when
the neuroscientists James Olds and P eter Milner ran an
experiment that revealed the neurological processes
behind craving and desire. By implanting electrodes in the
brains of rats, the researchers blocked the release of
dopamine. T o the surprise of the scientists, the rats lost all
will to live. They wouldn’t eat. They wouldn’t have sex.
They didn’t crave anything. W ithin a few days, the animals
died of thirst.
In follow-up studies, other scientists also inhibited the
dopamine-releasing parts of the brain, but this time, they
squirted little droplets of sugar into the mouths of the
dopamine-depleted rats. Their little rat faces lit up with
pleasurable grins from the tasty substance. Even though
dopamine was blocked, they liked  the sugar just as much as
before; they just didn’t want  it anymore. The ability to
experience pleasure remained, but without dopamine,
desire died. And without desire, action stopped.
When other researchers reversed this process and
ﬂooded the reward system of the brain with dopamine,
animals performed habits at breakneck speed. In one study ,
mice received a powerful hit of dopamine each time they
poked their nose in a box. W ithin minutes, the mice
developed a craving so strong they began poking their nose
into the box eight hundred times per hour . (Humans are not
so diﬀerent: the average slot machine player will spin the
wheel six hundred times per hour .)
Habits are a dopamine-driven feedback loop. Every
behavior that is highly habit-forming—taking drugs, eating
junk food, playing video games, browsing social media—is
associated with higher levels of dopamine. The same can be
said for our most basic habitual behaviors like eating food,
drinking water , having sex, and interacting socially .
For years, scientists assumed dopamine was all about
pleasure, but now we know it plays a central role in many
neurological processes, including motivation, learning and
memory , punishment and aversion, and voluntary
movement.
When it comes to habits, the key takeaway is this:
dopamine is released not only when you experience
pleasure, but also when you  anticipate  it. Gambling addicts
have a dopamine spike right before  they place a bet, not
after they win. Cocaine addicts get a surge of dopamine
when they see the powder , not after they take it. Whenever
you predict that an opportunity will be rewarding, your
levels of dopamine spike in anticipation. And whenever
dopamine rises, so does your motivation to act.
It is the anticipation of a reward—not the fulﬁllment of it
—that gets us to take action.
Interestingly , the reward system that is activated in the
brain when you receive  a reward is the same system that is
activated when you anticipate  a reward. This is one reason
the anticipation of an experience can often feel better than
the attainment of it. As a child, thinking about Christmas
morning can be better than opening the gifts. As an adult,
daydreaming about an upcoming vacation can be more
enjoyable than actually being on vacation. Scientists refer
to this as the diﬀerence between “wanting” and “liking.”
THE DOP AMINE SPIKE

FIGURE 9:  Befor e a habit is lear ned (A), dopamine is r eleased
when the r ewar d is e xperienced for the ﬁrst time. The ne xt time
around (B), dopamine rises befor e taking action, immediately
after a cue is r ecognized. This spik e leads to a feeling of desir e
and a craving to tak e action whenever the cue is spotted. Once
a habit is lear ned, dopamine will not rise when a r ewar d is
experienced because you alr eady e xpect the r ewar d. However, if
you see a cue and e xpect a r ewar d, but do not get one, then
dopamine will dr op in disappointment (C). The sensitivity of the
dopamine r esponse can clearly be seen when a r ewar d is
provided late (D). F irst, the cue is identiﬁed and dopamine rises
as a craving builds. Ne xt, a r esponse is tak en but the r ewar d
does not come as quickly as e xpected and dopamine begins to
drop. F inally, when the r ewar d comes a little later than you had
hoped, dopamine spik es again. It is as if the brain is saying,
“See! I knew I was right. Don’t for get to r epeat this action ne xt
time.”
Your brain has far more neural circuitry allocated for
wanting  rewards than for liking  them. The wanting centers
in the brain are large: the brain stem, the nucleus
accumbens, the ventral tegmental area, the dorsal
striatum, the amygdala, and portions of the prefrontal
cortex. By comparison, the liking centers of the brain are
much smaller . They are often referred to as “hedonic hot
spots” and are distributed like tiny islands throughout the
brain. F or instance, researchers have found that 100
percent of the nucleus accumbens is activated during
wanting. Meanwhile, only 10 percent of the structure is
activated during liking.
The fact that the brain allocates so much precious space
to the regions responsible for craving and desire provides
further evidence of the crucial role these processes play .
Desire is the engine that drives behavior . Every action is
taken because of the anticipation that precedes it. It is the
craving that leads to the response.
These insights reveal the importance of the 2nd Law of
Behavior Change. W e need to make our habits attractive
because it is the expectation of a rewarding experience that
motivates us to act in the ﬁrst place. This is where a
strategy known as temptation bundling comes into play .
HOW TO USE TEMPT ATION BUNDLING TO MAKE Y OUR
HABITS MORE A TTRACTIVE
Ronan Byrne, an electrical engineering student in Dublin,
Ireland, enjoyed watching Netﬂix, but he also knew that he
should exercise more often than he did. Putting his
engineering skills to use, Byrne hacked his stationary bike
and connected it to his laptop and television. Then he wrote
a computer program that would allow Netﬂix to run only if
he was cycling at a certain speed. If he slowed down for too
long, whatever show he was watching would pause until he
started pedaling again. He was, in the words of one fan,
“eliminating obesity one Netﬂix binge at a time.”
He was also employing temptation bundling to make his
exercise habit more attractive. T emptation bundling works
by linking an action you want to do with an action you need
to do . In Byrne’s case, he bundled watching Netﬂix (the
thing he wanted to do) with riding his stationary bike (the
thing he needed to do).
Businesses are masters at temptation bundling. F or
instance, when the American Broadcasting Company , more
commonly known as AB C, launched its Thursday-night
television lineup for the 2014–2015 season, they promoted
temptation bundling on a massive scale.
Every Thursday , the company would air three shows
created by screenwriter Shonda Rhimes— Grey’s Anatomy ,
Scandal , and How to Get A way with Murder . They branded
it as “TGIT on AB C” (TGIT stands for Thank God It’s
Thursday). In addition to promoting the shows, AB C
encouraged viewers to make popcorn, drink red wine, and
enjoy the evening.
Andrew K ubitz, head of scheduling for AB C, described
the idea behind the campaign: “ We see Thursday night as a
viewership opportunity , with either couples or women by
themselves who want to sit down and escape and have fun
and drink their red wine and have some popcorn.” The
brilliance of this strategy is that AB C was associating the
thing they needed  viewers to do (watch their shows) with
activities their viewers already  wanted  to do (relax, drink
wine, and eat popcorn).
Over time, people began to connect watching AB C with
feeling relaxed and entertained. If you drink red wine and
eat popcorn at 8 p.m. every Thursday , then eventually “8
p.m. on Thursday” means  relaxation and entertainment.
The reward gets associated with the cue, and the habit of
turning on the television becomes more attractive.
You’re more likely to ﬁnd a behavior attractive if you get
to do one of your favorite things at the same time. P erhaps
you want to hear about the latest celebrity gossip, but you
need to get in shape. Using temptation bundling, you could
only read the tabloids and watch reality shows at the gym.
Maybe you want to get a pedicure, but you need to clean
out your email inbox. Solution: only get a pedicure while
processing overdue work emails.
Temptation bundling is one way to apply a psychology
theory known as Premack’s Principle. Named after the
work of professor David Premack, the principle states that
“more probable behaviors will reinforce less probable
behaviors.” In other words, even if you don’t really want to
process overdue work emails, you’ll become conditioned to
do it if it means you get to do something you really want to
do along the way .
You can even combine temptation bundling with the
habit stacking strategy we discussed in Chapter 5 to create
a set of rules to guide your behavior .
The habit stacking + temptation bundling formula
is:
1. After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [HABIT I NEED].
2. After [HABIT I NEED], I will [HABIT I W ANT].
If you want to read the news, but you need to express
more gratitude:
1. After I get my morning coﬀee, I will say one thing I’m
grateful for that happened yesterday (need).
2. After I say one thing I’m grateful for , I will read the
news (want).
If you want to watch sports, but you need to make sales
calls:
1. After I get back from my lunch break, I will call three
potential clients (need).
2. After I call three potential clients, I will check ESPN
(want).
If you want to check F acebook, but you need to exercise
more:
1. After I pull out my phone, I will do ten burpees (need).
2. After I do ten burpees, I will check F acebook (want).
The hope is that eventually you’ll look forward to calling
three clients or doing ten burpees because it means you get
to read the latest sports news or check F acebook. Doing the
thing you need to do means you get to do the thing you
want to do .
We began this chapter by discussing supernormal
stimuli, which are heightened versions of reality that
increase our desire to take action. T emptation bundling is
one way to create a heightened version of any habit by
connecting it with something you already want.
Engineering a truly irresistible habit is a hard task, but this
simple strategy can be employed to make nearly any habit
more attractive than it would be otherwise.
Chapter Summary
The 2nd Law of Behavior Change is make it attractive.
The more attractive an opportunity is, the more likely it
is to become habit-forming.
Habits are a dopamine-driven feedback loop. When
dopamine rises, so does our motivation to act.
It is the anticipation of a reward—not the fulﬁllment of
it—that gets us to take action. The greater the
anticipation, the greater the dopamine spike.
Temptation bundling is one way to make your habits
more attractive. The strategy is to pair an action you
want  to do with an action you need  to do.