I
9
The R ole of F amily and F riends in Shaping Y our Habits
N 1965, a Hungarian man named Laszlo P olgar wrote a
series of strange letters to a woman named Klara.
Laszlo was a ﬁrm believer in hard work. In fact, it was all
he believed in: he completely rejected the idea of innate
talent. He claimed that with deliberate practice and the
development of good habits, a child could become a genius
in any ﬁeld. His mantra was “ A genius is not born, but is
educated and trained.”
Laszlo believed in this idea so strongly that he wanted to
test it with his own children—and he was writing to Klara
because he “needed a wife willing to jump on board.” Klara
was a teacher and, although she may not have been as
adamant as Laszlo, she also believed that with proper
instruction, anyone could advance their skills.
Laszlo decided chess would be a suitable ﬁeld for the
experiment, and he laid out a plan to raise his children to
become chess prodigies. The kids would be home-schooled,
a rarity in Hungary at the time. The house would be ﬁlled
with chess books and pictures of famous chess players. The
children would play against each other constantly and
compete in the best tournaments they could ﬁnd. The
family would keep a meticulous ﬁle system of the
tournament history of every competitor the children faced.
Their lives would be dedicated to chess.
Laszlo successfully courted Klara, and within a few
years, the P olgars were parents to three young girls:
Susan, Soﬁa, and Judit.
Susan, the oldest, began playing chess when she was
four years old. W ithin six months, she was defeating adults.
Soﬁa, the middle child, did even better . By fourteen, she
was a world champion, and a few years later , she became a
grandmaster .
Judit, the youngest, was the best of all. By age ﬁve, she
could beat her father . At twelve, she was the youngest
player ever listed among the top one hundred chess players
in the world. A t ﬁfteen years and four months old, she
became the youngest grandmaster of all time—younger
than Bobby Fischer , the previous record holder . For twenty-
seven years, she was the number-one-ranked female chess
player in the world.
The childhood of the P olgar sisters was atypical, to say
the least. And yet, if you ask them about it, they claim their
lifestyle was attractive, even enjoyable. In interviews, the
sisters talk about their childhood as entertaining rather
than grueling. They loved playing chess. They couldn’t get
enough of it. Once, Laszlo reportedly found Soﬁa playing
chess in the bathroom in the middle of the night.
Encouraging her to go back to sleep, he said, “Soﬁa, leave
the pieces alone!” T o which she replied, “Daddy , they won’t
leave me alone!”
The P olgar sisters grew up in a culture that prioritized
chess above all else—praised them for it, rewarded them
for it. In their world, an obsession with chess was normal.
And as we are about to see, whatever habits are normal in
your culture are among the most attractive behaviors you’ll
ﬁnd.
THE SEDUCTIVE PULL OF SOCIAL NORMS
Humans are herd animals. W e want to ﬁt in, to bond with
others, and to earn the respect and approval of our peers.
Such inclinations are essential to our survival. F or most of
our evolutionary history , our ancestors lived in tribes.
Becoming separated from the tribe—or worse, being cast
out—was a death sentence. “The lone wolf dies, but the
pack survives.” *
Meanwhile, those who collaborated and bonded with
others enjoyed increased safety , mating opportunities, and
access to resources. As Charles Darwin noted, “In the long
history of humankind, those who learned to collaborate and
improvise most eﬀectively have prevailed.” As a result, one
of the deepest human desires is to belong. And this ancient
preference exerts a powerful inﬂuence on our modern
behavior .
We don’t choose our earliest habits, we imitate them. W e
follow the script handed down by our friends and family ,
our church or school, our local community and society at
large. Each of these cultures and groups comes with its
own set of expectations and standards—when and whether
to get married, how many children to have, which holidays
to celebrate, how much money to spend on your child’s
birthday party . In many ways, these social norms are the
invisible rules that guide your behavior each day . You’re
always keeping them in mind, even if they are at the not
top of your mind. Often, you follow the habits of your
culture without thinking, without questioning, and
sometimes without remembering. As the French
philosopher Michel de Montaigne wrote, “The customs and
practices of life in society sweep us along.”
Most of the time, going along with the group does not
feel like a burden. Everyone wants to belong. If you grow
up in a family that rewards you for your chess skills,
playing chess will seem like a very attractive thing to do . If
you work in a job where everyone wears expensive suits,
then you’ll be inclined to splurge on one as well. If all of
your friends are sharing an inside joke or using a new
phrase, you’ll want to do it, too, so they know that you “get
it.” Behaviors are attractive when they help us ﬁt in.
We imitate the habits of three groups in particular:
1. The close.
2. The many .
3. The powerful.
Each group oﬀers an opportunity to leverage the 2nd
Law of Behavior Change and make our habits more
attractive.
1. Imitating the Close
Proximity has a powerful eﬀect on our behavior . This is true
of the physical environment, as we discussed in Chapter 6,
but it is also true of the social environment.
We pick up habits from the people around us. W e copy
the way our parents handle arguments, the way our peers
ﬂirt with one another , the way our coworkers get results.
When your friends smoke pot, you give it a try , too. When
your wife has a habit of double-checking that the door is
locked before going to bed, you pick it up as well.
I ﬁnd that I often imitate the behavior of those around
me without realizing it. In conversation, I’ll automatically
assume the body posture of the other person. In college, I
began to talk like my roommates. When traveling to other
countries, I unconsciously imitate the local accent despite
reminding myself to stop.
As a general rule, the closer we are to someone, the
more likely we are to imitate some of their habits. One
groundbreaking study tracked twelve thousand people for
thirty-two years and found that “ a person’s chances of
becoming obese increased by 57 percent if he or she had a
friend who became obese.” It works the other way , too.
Another study found that if one person in a relationship lost
weight, the other partner would also slim down about one
third of the time. Our friends and family provide a sort of
invisible peer pressure that pulls us in their direction.
Of course, peer pressure is bad only if you’re surrounded
by bad inﬂuences. When astronaut Mike Massimino was a
graduate student at MIT , he took a small robotics class. Of
the ten people in the class, four became astronauts. If your
goal was to make it into space, then that room was about
the best culture you could ask for . Similarly , one study
found that the higher your best friend’s IQ at age eleven or
twelve, the higher your IQ would be at age ﬁfteen, even
after controlling for natural levels of intelligence. W e soak
up the qualities and practices of those around us.
One of the most eﬀective things you can do to build
better habits is to join a culture where your desired
behavior is the normal behavior . New habits seem
achievable when you see others doing them every day . If
you are surrounded by ﬁt people, you’re more likely to
consider working out to be a common habit. If you’re
surrounded by jazz lovers, you’re more likely to believe it’s
reasonable to play jazz every day . Your culture sets your
expectation for what is “normal.” Surround yourself with
people who have the habits you want to have yourself .
You’ll rise together .
To make your habits even more attractive, you can take
this strategy one step further .
Join a culture where (1) your desired behavior is the
normal behavior and (2) you already have something in
common with the group. Steve Kamb, an entrepreneur in
New Y ork City , runs a company called Nerd Fitness, which
“helps nerds, misﬁts, and mutants lose weight, get strong,
and get healthy .” His clients include video game lovers,
movie fanatics, and average Joes who want to get in shape.
Many people feel out of place the ﬁrst time they go to the
gym or try to change their diet, but if you are already
similar to the other members of the group in some way—
say, your mutual love of Star W ars—change becomes more
appealing because it feels like something people like you
already do .
Nothing sustains motivation better than belonging to the
tribe. It transforms a personal quest into a shared one.
Previously , you were on your own. Y our identity was
singular . You are a reader . You are a musician. Y ou are an
athlete. When you join a book club or a band or a cycling
group, your identity becomes linked to those around you.
Growth and change is no longer an individual pursuit. We
are readers. W e are musicians. W e are cyclists.  The shared
identity begins to reinforce your personal identity . This is
why remaining part of a group after achieving a goal is
crucial to maintaining your habits. It’s friendship and
community that embed a new identity and help behaviors
last over the long run.
2. Imitating the Many
In the 1950s, psychologist Solomon Asch conducted a
series of experiments that are now taught to legions of
undergrads each year . To begin each experiment, the
subject entered the room with a group of strangers.
Unbeknownst to them, the other participants were actors
planted by the researcher and instructed to deliver scripted
answers to certain questions.
The group would be shown one card with a line on it and
then a second card with a series of lines. Each person was
asked to select the line on the second card that was similar
in length to the line on the ﬁrst card. It was a very simple
task. Here is an example of two cards used in the
experiment:
CONFORMING TO SOCIAL NORMS
FIGURE 10: This is a r epresentation of two car ds used by
Solomon Asch in his famous social confor mity e xperiments. The
length of the line on the ﬁrst car d (lef t) is obviously the same as
line C, but when a gr oup of actors claimed it was a diﬀer ent
length the r esear ch subjects would of ten change their minds and
go with the cr owd rather than believe their own eyes.
The experiment always began the same. First, there
would be some easy trials where everyone agreed on the
correct line. A fter a few rounds, the participants were
shown a test that was just as obvious as the previous ones,
except the actors in the room would select an intentionally
incorrect  answer . For example, they would respond “ A” to
the comparison shown in Figure 10. Everyone would agree
that the lines were the same even though they were clearly
diﬀerent.
The subject, who was unaware of the ruse, would
immediately become bewildered. Their eyes would open
wide. They would laugh nervously to themselves. They
would double-check the reactions of other participants.
Their agitation would grow as one person after another
delivered the same incorrect response. Soon, the subject
began to doubt their own eyes. Eventually , they delivered
the answer they knew in their heart to be incorrect.
Asch ran this experiment many times and in many
diﬀerent ways. What he discovered was that as the number
of actors increased, so did the conformity of the subject. If
it was just the subject and one actor , then there was no
eﬀect on the person’s choice. They just assumed they were
in the room with a dummy . When two actors were in the
room with the subject, there was still little impact. But as
the number of people increased to three actors and four
and all the way to eight, the subject became more likely to
second-guess themselves. By the end of the experiment,
nearly 75 percent of the subjects had agreed with the
group answer even though it was obviously incorrect.
Whenever we are unsure how to act, we look to the
group to guide our behavior . We are constantly scanning
our environment and wondering, “ What is everyone else
doing?” W e check reviews on Amazon or Y elp or
TripAdvisor because we want to imitate the “best” buying,
eating, and travel habits. It’s usually a smart strategy .
There is evidence in numbers.
But there can be a downside.
The normal behavior of the tribe often overpowers the
desired behavior of the individual. F or example, one study
found that when a chimpanzee learns an eﬀective way to
crack nuts open as a member of one group and then
switches to a new group that uses a less eﬀective strategy ,
it will avoid using the superior nut cracking method just to
blend in with the rest of the chimps.
Humans are similar . There is tremendous internal
pressure to comply with the norms of the group. The
reward of being accepted is often greater than the reward
of winning an argument, looking smart, or ﬁnding truth.
Most days, we’d rather be wrong with the crowd than be
right by ourselves.
The human mind knows how to get along with others. It
wants  to get along with others. This is our natural mode.
You can override it—you can choose to ignore the group or
to stop caring what other people think—but it takes work.
Running against the grain of your culture requires extra
eﬀort.
When changing your habits means challenging the tribe,
change is unattractive. When changing your habits means
ﬁtting in with the tribe, change is very attractive.
3. Imitating the P owerful
Humans everywhere pursue power , prestige, and status.
We want pins and medallions on our jackets. W e want
President or P artner in our titles. W e want to be
acknowledged, recognized, and praised. This tendency can
seem vain, but overall, it’s a smart move. Historically , a
person with greater power and status has access to more
resources, worries less about survival, and proves to be a
more attractive mate.
We are drawn to behaviors that earn us respect,
approval, admiration, and status. W e want to be the one in
the gym who can do muscle-ups or the musician who can
play the hardest chord progressions or the parent with the
most accomplished children because these things separate
us from the crowd. Once we ﬁt in, we start looking for ways
to stand out.
This is one reason we care so much about the habits of
highly eﬀective people. W e try to copy the behavior of
successful people because we desire success ourselves.
Many of our daily habits are imitations of people we
admire. Y ou replicate the marketing strategies of the most
successful ﬁrms in your industry . You make a recipe from
your favorite baker . You borrow the storytelling strategies
of your favorite writer . You mimic the communication style
of your boss. W e imitate people we envy .
High-status people enjoy the approval, respect, and
praise of others. And that means if a behavior can get us
approval, respect, and praise, we ﬁnd it attractive.
We are also motivated to avoid behaviors that would
lower our status. W e trim our hedges and mow our lawn
because we don’t want to be the slob of the neighborhood.
When our mother comes to visit, we clean up the house
because we don’t want to be judged. W e are continually
wondering “ What will others think of me?” and altering our
behavior based on the answer .
The P olgar sisters—the chess prodigies mentioned at the
beginning of this chapter—are evidence of the powerful
and lasting impact social inﬂuences can have on our
behavior . The sisters practiced chess for many hours each
day and continued this remarkable eﬀort for decades. But
these habits and behaviors maintained their attractiveness,
in part, because they were valued by their culture. From
the praise of their parents to the achievement of diﬀerent
status markers like becoming a grandmaster , they had
many reasons to continue their eﬀort.
Chapter Summary
The culture we live in determines which behaviors are
attractive to us.
We tend to adopt habits that are praised and approved
of by our culture because we have a strong desire to ﬁt
in and belong to the tribe.
We tend to imitate the habits of three social groups:
the close (family and friends), the many (the tribe), and
the powerful (those with status and prestige).
One of the most eﬀective things you can do to build
better habits is to join a culture where (1) your desired
behavior is the normal behavior and (2) you already
have something in common with the group.
The normal behavior of the tribe often overpowers the
desired behavior of the individual. Most days, we’d
rather be wrong with the crowd than be right by
ourselves.
If a behavior can get us approval, respect, and praise,
we ﬁnd it attractive.