I
10
How to F ind and F ix the Causes of Y our Bad Habits
N LATE 2012, I was sitting in an old apartment just a few
blocks from Istanbul’s most famous street, Istiklal
Caddesi. I was in the middle of a four-day trip to Turkey
and my guide, Mike, was relaxing in a worn-out armchair a
few feet away .
Mike wasn’t really a guide. He was just a guy from
Maine who had been living in Turkey for ﬁve years, but he
oﬀered to show me around while I was visiting the country
and I took him up on it. On this particular night, I had been
invited to dinner with him and a handful of his Turkish
friends.
There were seven of us, and I was the only one who
hadn’t, at some point, smoked at least one pack of
cigarettes per day . I asked one of the Turks how he got
started. “Friends,” he said. “It always starts with your
friends. One friend smokes, then you try it.”
What was truly fascinating was that half of the people in
the room had managed to quit smoking. Mike had been
smoke-free for a few years at that point, and he swore up
and down that he broke the habit because of a book called
Allen Carr’s Easy W ay to Stop Smoking .
“It frees you from the mental burden of smoking,” he
said. “It tells you: ‘Stop lying to yourself . You know you
don’t actually want to smoke. Y ou know you don’t really
enjoy this.’ It helps you feel like you’re not the victim
anymore. Y ou start to realize that you don’t need  to
smoke.”
I had never tried a cigarette, but I took a look at the
book afterward out of curiosity . The author employs an
interesting strategy to help smokers eliminate their
cravings. He systematically reframes each cue associated
with smoking and gives it a new meaning.
He says things like:
You think you are quitting something, but you’re not
quitting anything because cigarettes do nothing for
you.
You think smoking is something you need to do to be
social, but it’s not. Y ou can be social without smoking
at all.
You think smoking is about relieving stress, but it’s not.
Smoking does not relieve your nerves, it destroys them.
Over and over , he repeats these phrases and others like
them. “Get it clearly into your mind,” he says. “ You are
losing nothing and you are making marvelous positive gains
not only in health, energy and money but also in
conﬁdence, self -respect, freedom and, most important of
all, in the length and quality of your future life.”
By the time you get to the end of the book, smoking
seems like the most ridiculous thing in the world to do . And
if you no longer expect smoking to bring you any beneﬁts,
you have no reason to smoke. It is an inversion of the 2nd
Law of Behavior Change: make it unattractive .
Now, I know this idea might sound overly simplistic. Just
change your mind and you can quit smoking. But stick with
me for a minute.
WHERE CRA VINGS COME FROM
Every behavior has a surface level craving and a deeper ,
underlying motive. I often have a craving that goes
something like this: “I want to eat tacos.” If you were to ask
me why I want to eat tacos, I wouldn’t say , “Because I need
food to survive.” But the truth is, somewhere deep down, I
am motivated to eat tacos because I have to eat to survive.
The underlying motive is to obtain food and water even if
my speciﬁc craving is for a taco .
Some of our underlying motives include: *
Conserve energy
Obtain food and water
Find love and reproduce
Connect and bond with others
Win social acceptance and approval
Reduce uncertainty
Achieve status and prestige
A craving is just a speciﬁc manifestation of a deeper
underlying motive. Y our brain did not evolve with a desire
to smoke cigarettes or to check Instagram or to play video
games. A t a deep level, you simply want to reduce
uncertainty and relieve anxiety , to win social acceptance
and approval, or to achieve status.
Look at nearly any product that is habit-forming and
you’ll see that it does not create a new motivation, but
rather latches onto the underlying motives of human
nature.
Find love and reproduce = using Tinder
Connect and bond with others = browsing F acebook
Win social acceptance and approval = posting on
Instagram
Reduce uncertainty = searching on Google
Achieve status and prestige = playing video games
Your habits are modern-day solutions to ancient desires.
New versions of old vices. The underlying motives behind
human behavior remain the same. The speciﬁc habits we
perform diﬀer based on the period of history .
Here’s the powerful part: there are many diﬀerent ways
to address the same underlying motive. One person might
learn to reduce stress by smoking a cigarette. Another
person learns to ease their anxiety by going for a run. Y our
current habits are not necessarily the best way to solve the
problems you face; they are just the methods you learned
to use. Once you associate a solution with the problem you
need to solve, you keep coming back to it.
Habits are all about associations. These associations
determine whether we predict a habit to be worth
repeating or not. As we covered in our discussion of the 1st
Law, your brain is continually absorbing information and
noticing cues in the environment. Every time you perceive
a cue, your brain runs a simulation and makes a prediction
about what to do in the next moment.
Cue: Y ou notice that the stove is hot.
Prediction: If I touch it I’ll get burned, so I should avoid
touching it.
Cue: Y ou see that the traﬀic light turned green.
Prediction: If I step on the gas, I’ll make it safely through
the intersection and get closer to my destination, so I
should step on the gas.
You see a cue, categorize it based on past experience, and
determine the appropriate response.
This all happens in an instant, but it plays a crucial role
in your habits because every action is preceded by a
prediction. Life feels reactive, but it is actually predictive.
All day long, you are making your best guess of how to act
given what you’ve just seen and what has worked for you in
the past. Y ou are endlessly predicting what will happen in
the next moment.
Our behavior is heavily dependent on these predictions.
Put another way , our behavior is heavily dependent on how
we interpret the events that happen to us, not necessarily
the objective reality of the events themselves. T wo people
can look at the same cigarette, and one feels the urge to
smoke while the other is repulsed by the smell. The same
cue can spark a good habit or a bad habit depending on
your prediction. The cause of your habits is actually the
prediction that precedes them.
These predictions lead to feelings, which is how we
typically describe a craving—a feeling, a desire, an urge.
Feelings and emotions transform the cues we perceive and
the predictions we make into a signal that we can apply .
They help explain what we are currently sensing. F or
instance, whether or not you realize it, you are noticing
how warm or cold you feel right now . If the temperature
drops by one degree, you probably won’t do anything. If the
temperature drops ten degrees, however , you’ll feel cold
and put on another layer of clothing. F eeling cold was the
signal that prompted you to act. Y ou have been sensing the
cues the entire time, but it is only when you predict that
you would be better oﬀ in a diﬀerent state that you take
action.
A craving is the sense that something is missing. It is the
desire to change your internal state. When the temperature
falls, there is a gap between what your body is currently
sensing and what it wants  to be sensing. This gap between
your current state and your desired state provides a reason
to act.
Desire is the diﬀerence between where you are now and
where you want to be in the future. Even the tiniest action
is tinged with the motivation to feel diﬀerently than you do
in the moment. When you binge-eat or light up or browse
social media, what you really want is not a potato chip or a
cigarette or a bunch of likes. What you really want is to feel
diﬀerent.
Our feelings and emotions tell us whether to hold steady
in our current state or to make a change. They help us
decide the best course of action. Neurologists have
discovered that when emotions and feelings are impaired,
we actually lose the ability to make decisions. W e have no
signal of what to pursue and what to avoid. As the
neuroscientist Antonio Damasio explains, “It is emotion
that allows you to mark things as good, bad, or indiﬀerent.”
To summarize, the speciﬁc cravings you feel and habits
you perform are really an attempt to address your
fundamental underlying motives. Whenever a habit
successfully addresses a motive, you develop a craving to
do it again. In time, you learn to predict that checking
social media will help you feel loved or that watching
YouTube will allow you to forget your fears. Habits are
attractive when we associate them with positive feelings,
and we can use this insight to our advantage rather than to
our detriment.
HOW TO REPROGRAM Y OUR BRAIN TO ENJO Y HARD
HABITS
You can make hard habits more attractive if you can learn
to associate them with a positive experience. Sometimes,
all you need is a slight mind-set shift. F or instance, we
often talk about everything we have to do in a given day .
You have to wake up early for work. Y ou have to make
another sales call for your business. Y ou have to cook
dinner for your family .
Now, imagine changing just one word: You don’t “have”
to. You “get” to .
You get to wake up early for work. Y ou get to make
another sales call for your business. Y ou get to cook dinner
for your family . By simply changing one word, you shift the
way you view each event. Y ou transition from seeing these
behaviors as burdens and turn them into opportunities.
The key point is that both versions of reality are true.
You have  to do those things, and you also get to do them.
We can ﬁnd evidence for whatever mind-set we choose.
I once heard a story about a man who uses a wheelchair .
When asked if it was diﬀicult being conﬁned, he responded,
“I’m not conﬁned to my wheelchair—I am liberated by it. If
it wasn’t for my wheelchair , I would be bed-bound and
never able to leave my house.” This shift in perspective
completely transformed how he lived each day .
Reframing your habits to highlight their beneﬁts  rather
than their drawbacks is a fast and lightweight way to
reprogram your mind and make a habit seem more
attractive.
Exercise. Many people associate exercise with being a
challenging task that drains energy and wears you down.
You can just as easily view it as a way to develop skills and
build you up. Instead of telling yourself “I need to go run in
the morning,” say “ It’s time to build endurance and get
fast.”
Finance.  Saving money is often associated with
sacriﬁce. However , you can associate it with freedom
rather than limitation if you realize one simple truth: living
below your current means increases  your future means.
The money you save this month increases your purchasing
power next month.
Meditation.  Anyone who has tried meditation for more
than three seconds knows how frustrating it can be when
the next distraction inevitably pops into your mind. Y ou can
transform frustration into delight when you realize that
each interruption gives you a chance to practice returning
to your breath. Distraction is a good thing because you
need distractions to practice meditation.
Pregame jitters.  Many people feel anxious before
delivering a big presentation or competing in an important
event. They experience quicker breathing, a faster heart
rate, heightened arousal. If we interpret these feelings
negatively , then we feel threatened and tense up. If we
interpret these feelings positively , then we can respond
with ﬂuidity and grace. Y ou can reframe “I am nervous” to
“I am excited and I’m getting an adrenaline rush to help me
concentrate.”
These little mind-set shifts aren’t magic, but they can
help change the feelings you associate with a particular
habit or situation.
If you want to take it a step further , you can create a
motivation ritual . You simply practice associating your
habits with something you enjoy , then you can use that cue
whenever you need a bit of motivation. F or instance, if you
always play the same song before having sex, then you’ll
begin to link the music with the act. Whenever you want to
get in the mood, just press play .
Ed Latimore, a boxer and writer from Pittsburgh,
beneﬁted from a similar strategy without knowing it. “Odd
realization,” he wrote. “My focus and concentration goes
up just by putting my headphones [on] while writing. I
don’t even have to play any music.” W ithout realizing it, he
was conditioning himself . In the beginning, he put his
headphones on, played some music he enjoyed, and did
focused work. A fter doing it ﬁve, ten, twenty times, putting
his headphones on became a cue that he automatically
associated with increased focus. The craving followed
naturally .
Athletes use similar strategies to get themselves in the
mind-set to perform. During my baseball career , I
developed a speciﬁc ritual of stretching and throwing
before each game. The whole sequence took about ten
minutes, and I did it the same way every single time. While
it physically warmed me up to play , more importantly , it put
me in the right mental state. I began to associate my
pregame ritual with feeling competitive and focused. Even
if I wasn’t motivated beforehand, by the time I was done
with my ritual, I was in “game mode.”
You can adapt this strategy for nearly any purpose. Say
you want to feel happier in general. Find something that
makes you truly happy—like petting your dog or taking a
bubble bath—and then create a short routine that you
perform every time before  you do the thing you love.
Maybe you take three deep breaths and smile.
Three deep breaths. Smile. P et the dog. Repeat.
Eventually , you’ll begin to associate this breathe-and-
smile routine with being in a good mood. It becomes a cue
that means  feeling happy . Once established, you can break
it out anytime you need to change your emotional state.
Stressed at work? T ake three deep breaths and smile. Sad
about life? Three deep breaths and smile. Once a habit has
been built, the cue can prompt a craving, even if it has little
to do with the original situation.
The key to ﬁnding and ﬁxing the causes of your bad
habits is to reframe the associations you have about them.
It’s not easy , but if you can reprogram your predictions, you
can transform a hard habit into an attractive one.
Chapter Summary
The inversion of the 2nd Law of Behavior Change is
make it unattractive .
Every behavior has a surface level craving and a
deeper underlying motive.
Your habits are modern-day solutions to ancient
desires.
The cause of your habits is actually the prediction that
precedes them. The prediction leads to a feeling.
Highlight the beneﬁts of avoiding a bad habit to make
it seem unattractive.
Habits are attractive when we associate them with
positive feelings and unattractive when we associate
them with negative feelings. Create a motivation ritual
by doing something you enjoy immediately before a
diﬀicult habit.
HOW TO CREA TE A GOOD HABIT
The 1st Law: Mak e It Obvious
1.1: Fill out the Habits Scor ecard. Write down your cur rent habits to become
awar e of them.
1.2: Use implementation intentions: “I will [BEHA VIOR] at [TIME] in
[LOCATION].”
1.3: Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].”
1.4: Design your envir onment. Mak e the cues of good habits obvious and
visible.
The 2nd Law: Mak e It Attractive
2.1: Use temptation bundling. P air an action you want  to do with an action you
need  to do .
2.2: Join a cultur e wher e your desir ed behavior is the nor mal behavior .
2.3: Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately befor e a
diﬃcult habit.
The 3rd Law: Mak e It Easy
The 4th Law: Mak e It Satisfying
HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT
Inversion of the 1st Law: Mak e It Invisible
1.5: Reduce e xposur e. Remove the cues of your bad habits fr om your
envir onment.
Inversion of the 2nd Law: Mak e It Unattractive
2.4: Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the beneﬁts of avoiding your bad habits.
Inversion of the 3rd Law: Mak e It Diﬃcult
Inversion of the 4th Law: Mak e It Unsatisfying
You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at:
atomichabits.com/cheatsheet