O
11
Walk Slowly, but Never Backwar d
N THE FIRST day of class, Jerry Uelsmann, a professor at
the University of Florida, divided his ﬁlm photography
students into two groups.
Everyone on the left side of the classroom, he explained,
would be in the “quantity” group. They would be graded
solely on the amount of work they produced. On the ﬁnal
day of class, he would tally the number of photos submitted
by each student. One hundred photos would rate an A,
ninety photos a B, eighty photos a C , and so on.
Meanwhile, everyone on the right side of the room would
be in the “quality” group. They would be graded only on the
excellence of their work. They would only need to produce
one photo during the semester , but to get an A, it had to be
a nearly perfect image.
At the end of the term, he was surprised to ﬁnd that all
the best photos were produced by the quantity  group.
During the semester , these students were busy taking
photos, experimenting with composition and lighting,
testing out various methods in the darkroom, and learning
from their mistakes. In the process of creating hundreds of
photos, they honed their skills. Meanwhile, the quality
group sat around speculating about perfection. In the end,
they had little to show for their eﬀorts other than
unveriﬁed theories and one mediocre photo .*
It is easy to get bogged down trying to ﬁnd the optimal
plan for change: the fastest way to lose weight, the best
program to build muscle, the perfect idea for a side hustle.
We are so focused on ﬁguring out the best approach that
we never get around to taking action. As Voltaire once
wrote, “The best is the enemy of the good.”
I refer to this as the diﬀerence between being in motion
and taking action. The two ideas sound similar , but they’re
not the same. When you’re in motion, you’re planning and
strategizing and learning. Those are all good things, but
they don’t produce a result.
Action, on the other hand, is the type of behavior that
will deliver an outcome. If I outline twenty ideas for articles
I want to write, that’s motion. If I actually sit down and
write an article, that’s action. If I search for a better diet
plan and read a few books on the topic, that’s motion. If I
actually eat a healthy meal, that’s action.
Sometimes motion is useful, but it will never produce an
outcome by itself . It doesn’t matter how many times you go
talk to the personal trainer , that motion will never get you
in shape. Only the action of working out will get the result
you’re looking to achieve.
If motion doesn’t lead to results, why do we do it?
Sometimes we do it because we actually need to plan or
learn more. But more often than not, we do it because
motion allows us to feel like we’re making progress without
running the risk of failure. Most of us are experts at
avoiding criticism. It doesn’t feel good to fail or to be
judged publicly , so we tend to avoid situations where that
might happen. And that’s the biggest reason why you slip
into motion rather than taking action: you want to delay
failure.
It’s easy to be in motion and convince yourself that
you’re still making progress. Y ou think, “I’ve got
conversations going with four potential clients right now .
This is good. W e’re moving in the right direction.” Or, “I
brainstormed some ideas for that book I want to write. This
is coming together .”
Motion makes you feel like you’re getting things done.
But really , you’re just preparing to get something done.
When preparation becomes a form of procrastination, you
need to change something. Y ou don’t want to merely be
planning. Y ou want to be practicing.
If you want to master a habit, the key is to start with
repetition, not perfection. Y ou don’t need to map out every
feature of a new habit. Y ou just need to practice it. This is
the ﬁrst takeaway of the 3rd Law: you just need to get your
reps in.
HOW L ONG DOES IT ACTU ALLY TAKE TO FORM A NEW
HABIT?
Habit formation is the process by which a behavior
becomes progressively more automatic through repetition.
The more you repeat an activity , the more the structure of
your brain changes to become eﬀicient at that activity .
Neuroscientists call this long-term potentiation , which
refers to the strengthening of connections between neurons
in the brain based on recent patterns of activity . With each
repetition, cell-to-cell signaling improves and the neural
connections tighten. First described by neuropsychologist
Donald Hebb in 1949, this phenomenon is commonly known
as Hebb’s Law: “ Neurons that ﬁre together wire together .”
Repeating a habit leads to clear physical changes in the
brain. In musicians, the cerebellum—critical for physical
movements like plucking a guitar string or pulling a violin
bow—is larger than it is in nonmusicians. Mathematicians,
meanwhile, have increased gray matter in the inferior
parietal lobule, which plays a key role in computation and
calculation. Its size is directly correlated with the amount
of time spent in the ﬁeld; the older and more experienced
the mathematician, the greater the increase in gray matter .
When scientists analyzed the brains of taxi drivers in
London, they found that the hippocampus—a region of the
brain involved in spatial memory—was signiﬁcantly larger
in their subjects than in non–taxi drivers. Even more
fascinating, the hippocampus decreased in size when a
driver retired. Like the muscles of the body responding to
regular weight training, particular regions of the brain
adapt as they are used and atrophy as they are abandoned.
Of course, the importance of repetition in establishing
habits was recognized long before neuroscientists began
poking around. In 1860, the English philosopher George H.
Lewes noted, “In learning to speak a new language, to play
on a musical instrument, or to perform unaccustomed
movements, great diﬀiculty is felt, because the channels
through which each sensation has to pass have not become
established; but no sooner has frequent repetition cut a
pathway , than this diﬀiculty vanishes; the actions become
so automatic that they can be performed while the mind is
otherwise engaged.” Both common sense and scientiﬁc
evidence agree: repetition is a form of change.
Each time you repeat an action, you are activating a
particular neural circuit associated with that habit. This
means that simply putting in your reps is one of the most
critical steps you can take to encoding a new habit. It is
why the students who took tons of photos improved their
skills while those who merely theorized about perfect
photos did not. One group engaged in active practice, the
other in passive learning. One in action, the other in
motion.
All habits follow a similar trajectory from eﬀortful
practice to automatic behavior , a process known as
automaticity . Automaticity is the ability to perform a
behavior without thinking about each step, which occurs
when the nonconscious mind takes over .
It looks something like this:
THE HABIT LINE
FIGURE 11:  In the beginning (point A), a habit r equir es a good
deal of eﬀort and concentration to perfor m. After a few
repetitions (point B), it gets easier, but still r equir es some
conscious attention. W ith enough practice (point C), the habit
becomes mor e automatic than conscious. Beyond this thr eshold
—the habit line —the behavior can be done mor e or less without
thinking. A new habit has been for med.
On the following page, you’ll see what it looks like when
researchers track the level of automaticity for an actual
habit like walking for ten minutes each day . The shape of
these charts, which scientists call  learning curves , reveals
an important truth about behavior change: habits form
based on frequency , not time.
WALKING 10 MINUTES PER DA Y
FIGURE 12:  This graph shows someone who built the habit of
walking for ten minutes af ter br eakfast each day . Notice that as
the repetitions incr ease, so does automaticity, until the behavior
is as easy and automatic as it can be.
One of the most common questions I hear is, “How long
does it take to build a new habit?” But what people really
should be asking is, “How many  does it take to form a new
habit?” That is, how many repetitions are required to make
a habit automatic?
There is nothing magical about time passing with regard
to habit formation. It doesn’t matter if it’s been twenty-one
days or thirty days or three hundred days. What matters is
the rate at which you perform the behavior . You could do
something twice in thirty days, or two hundred times. It’s
the frequency that makes the diﬀerence. Y our current
habits have been internalized over the course of hundreds,
if not thousands, of repetitions. New habits require the
same level of frequency . You need to string together
enough successful attempts until the behavior is ﬁrmly
embedded in your mind and you cross the Habit Line.
In practice, it doesn’t really matter how long it takes for
a habit to become automatic. What matters is that you take
the actions you need to take to make progress. Whether an
action is fully automatic is of less importance.
To build a habit, you need to practice it. And the most
eﬀective way to make practice happen is to adhere to the
3rd Law of Behavior Change: make it easy . The chapters
that follow will show you how to do exactly that.
Chapter Summary
The 3rd Law of Behavior Change is make it easy .
The most eﬀective form of learning is practice, not
planning.
Focus on taking action, not being in motion.
Habit formation is the process by which a behavior
becomes progressively more automatic through
repetition.
The amount of time you have been performing a habit
is not as important as the number of times you have
performed it.