I
12
The Law of L east Eﬀort
N HIS A WARD-WINNING BOOK , Guns, Germs, and Steel ,
anthropologist and biologist Jared Diamond points out a
simple fact: diﬀerent continents have diﬀerent shapes. A t
ﬁrst glance, this statement seems rather obvious and
unimportant, but it turns out to have a profound impact on
human behavior .
The primary axis of the Americas runs from north to
south. That is, the landmass of North and South America
tends to be tall and thin rather than wide and fat. The same
is generally true for A frica. Meanwhile, the landmass that
makes up Europe, Asia, and the Middle East is the
opposite. This massive stretch of land tends to be more
east-west in shape. According to Diamond, this diﬀerence
in shape played a signiﬁcant role in the spread of
agriculture over the centuries.
When agriculture began to spread around the globe,
farmers had an easier time expanding along east-west
routes than along north-south ones. This is because
locations along the same latitude generally share similar
climates, amounts of sunlight and rainfall, and changes in
season. These factors allowed farmers in Europe and Asia
to domesticate a few crops and grow them along the entire
stretch of land from France to China.
THE SHAPE OF HUMAN BEHA VIOR
FIGURE 13:  The primary axis of Eur ope and Asia is east-west.
The primary axis of the Americas and A frica is north-south. This
leads to a wider range of climates up-and-down the Americas
than acr oss Eur ope and Asia. As a r esult, agricultur e spr ead
nearly twice as fast acr oss Eur ope and Asia than it did
elsewher e. The behavior of far mers—even acr oss hundr eds or
thousands of years—was constrained by the amount of friction
in the envir onment.
By comparison, the climate varies greatly when traveling
from north to south. Just imagine how diﬀerent the weather
is in Florida compared to Canada. Y ou can be the most
talented farmer in the world, but it won’t help you grow
Florida oranges in the Canadian winter . Snow is a poor
substitute for soil. In order to spread crops along north-
south routes, farmers would need to ﬁnd and domesticate
new plants whenever the climate changed.
As a result, agriculture spread two to three times faster
across Asia and Europe than it did up and down the
Americas. Over the span of centuries, this small diﬀerence
had a very big impact. Increased food production allowed
for more rapid population growth. W ith more people, these
cultures were able to build stronger armies and were
better equipped to develop new technologies. The changes
started out small—a crop that spread slightly farther , a
population that grew slightly faster—but compounded into
substantial diﬀerences over time.
The spread of agriculture provides an example of the 3rd
Law of Behavior Change on a global scale. Conventional
wisdom holds that motivation is the key to habit change.
Maybe if you really  wanted it, you’d actually do it. But the
truth is, our real motivation is to be lazy and to do what is
convenient. And despite what the latest productivity best
seller will tell you, this is a smart strategy , not a dumb one.
Energy is precious, and the brain is wired to conserve it
whenever possible. It is human nature to follow the Law of
Least Eﬀort, which states that when deciding between two
similar options, people will naturally gravitate toward the
option that requires the least amount of work. * For
example, expanding your farm to the east where you can
grow the same crops rather than heading north where the
climate is diﬀerent. Out of all the possible actions we could
take, the one that is realized is the one that delivers the
most value for the least eﬀort. W e are motivated to do what
is easy .
Every action requires a certain amount of energy . The
more energy required, the less likely it is to occur . If your
goal is to do a hundred push-ups per day , that’s a lot of
energy! In the beginning, when you’re motivated and
excited, you can muster the strength to get started. But
after a few days, such a massive eﬀort feels exhausting.
Meanwhile, sticking to the habit of doing one push-up per
day requires almost no energy to get started. And the less
energy a habit requires, the more likely it is to occur .
Look at any behavior that ﬁlls up much of your life and
you’ll see that it can be performed with very low levels of
motivation. Habits like scrolling on our phones, checking
email, and watching television steal so much of our time
because they can be performed almost without eﬀort. They
are remarkably convenient.
In a sense, every habit is just an obstacle to getting what
you really want. Dieting is an obstacle to getting ﬁt.
Meditation is an obstacle to feeling calm. Journaling is an
obstacle to thinking clearly . You don’t actually want the
habit itself . What you really want is the outcome the habit
delivers. The greater the obstacle—that is, the more
diﬀicult the habit—the more friction there is between you
and your desired end state. This is why it is crucial to make
your habits so easy that you’ll do them even when you don’t
feel like it. If you can make your good habits more
convenient, you’ll be more likely to follow through on them.
But what about all the moments when we seem to do the
opposite? If we’re all so lazy , then how do you explain
people accomplishing hard things like raising a child or
starting a business or climbing Mount Everest?
Certainly , you are capable of doing very hard things. The
problem is that some days you feel like doing the hard work
and some days you feel like giving in. On the tough days,
it’s crucial to have as many things working in your favor as
possible so that you can overcome the challenges life
naturally throws your way . The less friction you face, the
easier it is for your stronger self to emerge. The idea
behind make it easy is not to only do easy things. The idea
is to make it as easy as possible in the moment to do things
that payoﬀ in the long run.
HOW TO ACHIEVE MORE WITH LES S EFFOR T
Imagine you are holding a garden hose that is bent in the
middle. Some water can ﬂow through, but not very much. If
you want to increase the rate at which water passes
through the hose, you have two options. The ﬁrst option is
to crank up the valve and force more water out. The second
option is to simply remove the bend in the hose and let
water ﬂow through naturally .
Trying to pump up your motivation to stick with a hard
habit is like trying to force water through a bent hose. Y ou
can do it, but it requires a lot of eﬀort and increases the
tension in your life. Meanwhile, making your habits simple
and easy is like removing the bend in the hose. R ather than
trying to overcome the friction in your life, you reduce it.
One of the most eﬀective ways to reduce the friction
associated with your habits is to practice environment
design. In Chapter 6, we discussed environment design as a
method for making cues more obvious, but you can also
optimize your environment to make actions easier . For
example, when deciding where to practice a new habit, it is
best to choose a place that is already along the path of your
daily routine. Habits are easier to build when they ﬁt into
the ﬂow of your life. Y ou are more likely to go to the gym if
it is on your way to work because stopping doesn’t add
much friction to your lifestyle. By comparison, if the gym is
oﬀ the path of your normal commute—even by just a few
blocks—now you’re going “out of your way” to get there.
Perhaps even more eﬀective is reducing the friction
within your home or oﬀice. T oo often, we try to start habits
in high-friction environments. W e try to follow a strict diet
while we are out to dinner with friends. W e try to write a
book in a chaotic household. W e try to concentrate while
using a smartphone ﬁlled with distractions. It doesn’t have
to be this way . We can remove the points of friction that
hold us back. This is precisely what electronics
manufacturers in Japan began to do in the 1970s.
In an article published in the New Y orker  titled “Better
All the Time,” James Suroweicki writes:
“Japanese ﬁrms emphasized what came to be known as
‘lean production,’ relentlessly looking to remove waste of
all kinds from the production process, down to redesigning
workspaces, so workers didn’t have to waste time twisting
and turning to reach their tools. The result was that
Japanese factories were more eﬀicient and Japanese
products were more reliable than American ones. In 1974,
service calls for American-made color televisions were ﬁve
times as common as for Japanese televisions. By 1979, it
took American workers three times as long to assemble
their sets.”
I like to refer to this strategy as addition by subtraction .*
The Japanese companies looked for every point of friction
in the manufacturing process and eliminated it. As they
subtracted wasted eﬀort, they added customers and
revenue. Similarly , when we remove the points of friction
that sap our time and energy , we can achieve more with
less eﬀort. (This is one reason tidying up can feel so good:
we are simultaneously moving forward and lightening the
cognitive load our environment places on us.)
If you look at the most habit-forming products, you’ll
notice that one of the things these goods and services do
best is remove little bits of friction from your life. Meal
delivery services reduce the friction of shopping for
groceries. Dating apps reduce the friction of making social
introductions. Ride-sharing services reduce the friction of
getting across town. T ext messaging reduces the friction of
sending a letter in the mail.
Like a Japanese television manufacturer redesigning
their workspace to reduce wasted motion, successful
companies design their products to automate, eliminate, or
simplify as many steps as possible. They reduce the number
of ﬁelds on each form. They pare down the number of clicks
required to create an account. They deliver their products
with easy-to-understand directions or ask their customers
to make fewer choices.
When the ﬁrst voice-activated speakers were released—
products like Google Home, Amazon Echo, and Apple
HomeP od—I asked a friend what he liked about the product
he had purchased. He said it was just easier to say “Play
some country music” than to pull out his phone, open the
music app, and pick a playlist. Of course, just a few years
earlier , having unlimited access to music in your pocket
was a remarkably frictionless behavior compared to driving
to the store and buying a CD . Business is a never-ending
quest to deliver the same result in an easier fashion.
Similar strategies have been used eﬀectively by
governments. When the British government wanted to
increase tax collection rates, they switched from sending
citizens to a web page where the tax form could be
downloaded to linking directly to the form. Reducing that
one step in the process increased the response rate from
19.2 percent to 23.4 percent. F or a country like the United
Kingdom, those percentage points represent millions in tax
revenue.
The central idea is to create an environment where doing
the right thing is as easy as possible. Much of the battle of
building better habits comes down to ﬁnding ways to
reduce the friction associated with our good habits and
increase the friction associated with our bad ones.
PRIME THE ENVIRONMENT FOR FUTURE USE
Oswald Nuckols is an IT developer from Natchez,
Mississippi. He is also someone who understands the power
of priming his environment.
Nuckols dialed in his cleaning habits by following a
strategy he refers to as “resetting the room.” F or instance,
when he ﬁnishes watching television, he places the remote
back on the TV stand, arranges the pillows on the couch,
and folds the blanket. When he leaves his car , he throws
any trash away . Whenever he takes a shower , he wipes
down the toilet while the shower is warming up. (As he
notes, the “ perfect time to clean the toilet is right before
you wash yourself in the shower anyway .”) The purpose of
resetting each room is not simply to clean up after the last
action, but to prepare for the next action.
“When I walk into a room everything is in its right
place,” Nuckols wrote. “Because I do this every day in
every room, stuﬀ always stays in good shape. . . . P eople
think I work hard but I’m actually really lazy . I’m just
proactively lazy . It gives you so much time back.”
Whenever you organize a space for its intended purpose,
you are priming it to make the next action easy . For
instance, my wife keeps a box of greeting cards that are
presorted by occasion—birthday , sympathy , wedding,
graduation, and more. Whenever necessary , she grabs an
appropriate card and sends it oﬀ . She is incredibly good at
remembering to send cards because she has reduced the
friction of doing so . For years, I was the opposite. Someone
would have a baby and I would think, “I should send a
card.” But then weeks would pass and by the time I
remembered to pick one up at the store, it was too late. The
habit wasn’t easy .
There are many ways to prime your environment so it’s
ready for immediate use. If you want to cook a healthy
breakfast, place the skillet on the stove, set the cooking
spray on the counter , and lay out any plates and utensils
you’ll need the night before. When you wake up, making
breakfast will be easy .
Want to draw more? Put your pencils, pens, notebooks,
and drawing tools on top of your desk, within easy
reach.
Want to exercise? Set out your workout clothes, shoes,
gym bag, and water bottle ahead of time.
Want to improve your diet? Chop up a ton of fruits and
vegetables on weekends and pack them in containers,
so you have easy access to healthy , ready-to-eat options
during the week.
These are simple ways to make the good habit the path
of least resistance.
You can also invert this principle and prime the
environment to make bad behaviors diﬀicult. If you ﬁnd
yourself watching too much television, for example, then
unplug it after each use. Only plug it back in if you can say
out loud the name of the show you want to watch. This
setup creates just enough friction to prevent mindless
viewing.
If that doesn’t do it, you can take it a step further .
Unplug the television and take the batteries out of the
remote after each use, so it takes an extra ten seconds to
turn it back on. And if you’re really hard-core, move the
television out of the living room and into a closet after each
use. Y ou can be sure you’ll only take it out when you really
want to watch something. The greater the friction, the less
likely the habit.
Whenever possible, I leave my phone in a diﬀerent room
until lunch. When it’s right next to me, I’ll check it all
morning for no reason at all. But when it is in another
room, I rarely think about it. And the friction is high
enough that I won’t go get it without a reason. As a result, I
get three to four hours each morning when I can work
without interruption.
If sticking your phone in another room doesn’t seem like
enough, tell a friend or family member to hide it from you
for a few hours. Ask a coworker to keep it at their desk in
the morning and give it back to you at lunch.
It is remarkable how little friction is required to prevent
unwanted behavior . When I hide beer in the back of the
fridge where I can’t see it, I drink less. When I delete social
media apps from my phone, it can be weeks before I
download them again and log in. These tricks are unlikely
to curb a true addiction, but for many of us, a little bit of
friction can be the diﬀerence between sticking with a good
habit or sliding into a bad one. Imagine the cumulative
impact of making dozens of these changes and living in an
environment designed to make the good behaviors easier
and the bad behaviors harder .
Whether we are approaching behavior change as an
individual, a parent, a coach, or a leader , we should ask
ourselves the same question: “How can we design a world
where it’s easy to do what’s right?” Redesign your life so
the actions that matter most are also the actions that are
easiest to do .
Chapter Summary
Human behavior follows the Law of Least Eﬀort. W e
will naturally gravitate toward the option that requires
the least amount of work.
Create an environment where doing the right thing is
as easy as possible.
Reduce the friction associated with good behaviors.
When friction is low , habits are easy .
Increase the friction associated with bad behaviors.
When friction is high, habits are diﬀicult.
Prime your environment to make future actions easier .