T
13
How to Stop P rocrastinating by Using the T wo-Minute
Rule
WYLA THARP IS widely regarded as one of the greatest
dancers and choreographers of the modern era. In
1992, she was awarded a MacArthur F ellowship, often
referred to as the Genius Grant, and she has spent the bulk
of her career touring the globe to perform her original
works. She also credits much of her success to simple daily
habits.
“I begin each day of my life with a ritual,” she writes. “I
wake up at 5:30 A.M., put on my workout clothes, my leg
warmers, my sweat shirt, and my hat. I walk outside my
Manhattan home, hail a taxi, and tell the driver to take me
to the Pumping Iron gym at 91st Street and First A venue,
where I work out for two hours.
“The ritual is not the stretching and weight training I put
my body through each morning at the gym; the ritual is the
cab. The moment I tell the driver where to go I have
completed the ritual.
“It’s a simple act, but doing it the same way each
morning habitualizes it—makes it repeatable, easy to do . It
reduces the chance that I would skip it or do it diﬀerently .
It is one more item in my arsenal of routines, and one less
thing to think about.”
Hailing a cab each morning may be a tiny action, but it is
a splendid example of the 3rd Law of Behavior Change.
Researchers estimate that 40 to 50 percent of our
actions on any given day are done out of habit. This is
already a substantial percentage, but the true inﬂuence of
your habits is even greater than these numbers suggest.
Habits are automatic choices that inﬂuence the conscious
decisions that follow . Yes, a habit can be completed in just a
few seconds, but it can also shape the actions that you take
for minutes or hours afterward.
Habits are like the entrance ramp to a highway . They
lead you down a path and, before you know it, you’re
speeding toward the next behavior . It seems to be easier to
continue what you are already doing than to start doing
something diﬀerent. Y ou sit through a bad movie for two
hours. Y ou keep snacking even when you’re already full.
You check your phone for “just a second” and soon you
have spent twenty minutes staring at the screen. In this
way, the habits you follow without thinking often determine
the choices you make when you are thinking.
Each evening, there is a tiny moment—usually around
5:15 p.m.—that shapes the rest of my night. My wife walks
in the door from work and either we change into our
workout clothes and head to the gym or we crash onto the
couch, order Indian food, and watch The Oﬀice .* Similar to
Twyla Tharp hailing the cab, the ritual is changing into my
workout clothes. If I change clothes, I know the workout
will happen. Everything that follows—driving to the gym,
deciding which exercises to do, stepping under the bar—is
easy once I’ve taken the ﬁrst step.
Every day , there are a handful of moments that deliver
an outsized impact. I refer to these little choices as decisive
moments . The moment you decide between ordering
takeout or cooking dinner . The moment you choose
between driving your car or riding your bike. The moment
you decide between starting your homework or grabbing
the video game controller . These choices are a fork in the
road.
DECISIVE MOMENTS
FIGURE 14:  The diﬀer ence between a good day and a bad day is
often a few pr oductive and healthy choices made at decisive
moments. Each one is lik e a fork in the r oad, and these choices
stack up thr oughout the day and can ultimately lead to very
diﬀer ent outcomes.
Decisive moments set the options available to your future
self. For instance, walking into a restaurant is a decisive
moment because it determines what you’ll be eating for
lunch. T echnically , you are in control of what you order , but
in a larger sense, you can only order an item if it is on the
menu. If you walk into a steakhouse, you can get a sirloin
or a rib eye, but not sushi. Y our options are constrained by
what’s available. They are shaped by the ﬁrst choice.
We are limited by where our habits lead us. This is why
mastering the decisive moments throughout your day is so
important. Each day is made up of many moments, but it is
really a few habitual choices that determine the path you
take. These little choices stack up, each one setting the
trajectory for how you spend the next chunk of time.
Habits are the entry point, not the end point. They are
the cab, not the gym.
THE TWO -MINUTE RULE
Even when you know you should start small, it’s easy to
start too big. When you dream about making a change,
excitement inevitably takes over and you end up trying to
do too much too soon. The most eﬀective way I know to
counteract this tendency is to use the  Two-Minute Rule ,
which states, “ When you start a new habit, it should take
less than two minutes to do .”
You’ll ﬁnd that nearly any habit can be scaled down into
a two-minute version:
“Read before bed each night” becomes “Read one
page.”
“Do thirty minutes of yoga” becomes “T ake out my
yoga mat.”
“Study for class” becomes “Open my notes.”
“Fold the laundry” becomes “F old one pair of socks.”
“Run three miles” becomes “Tie my running shoes.”
The idea is to make your habits as easy as possible to
start. Anyone can meditate for one minute, read one page,
or put one item of clothing away . And, as we have just
discussed, this is a powerful strategy because once you’ve
started doing the right thing, it is much easier to continue
doing it. A new habit should not feel like a challenge. The
actions that follow  can be challenging, but the ﬁrst two
minutes should be easy . What you want is a “gateway
habit” that naturally leads you down a more productive
path.
You can usually ﬁgure out the gateway habits that will
lead to your desired outcome by mapping out your goals on
a scale from “very easy” to “very hard.” F or instance,
running a marathon is very hard. Running a 5K is hard.
Walking ten thousand steps is moderately diﬀicult. W alking
ten minutes is easy . And putting on your running shoes is
very easy . Your goal might be to run a marathon, but your
gateway habit is to put on your running shoes. That’s how
you follow the T wo-Minute Rule.
Very easy Easy Moderate HardVery
hard
Put on your
running shoesWalk ten
minutesWalk ten
thousand
stepsRun a 5KRun a
marathon
Write one
sentenceWrite one
paragraphWrite one
thousand
wordsWrite a ﬁve-
thousand-wor d
articleWrite a
book
Open your
notesStudy for
ten minutesStudy for
three hoursGet straight A’sEarn a
PhD
People often think it’s weird to get hyped about reading
one page or meditating for one minute or making one sales
call. But the point is not to do one thing. The point is to
master the habit of showing up. The truth is, a habit must
be established before it can be improved. If you can’t learn
the basic skill of showing up, then you have little hope of
mastering the ﬁner details. Instead of trying to engineer a
perfect habit from the start, do the easy thing on a more
consistent basis. Y ou have to standardize before you can
optimize.
As you master the art of showing up, the ﬁrst two
minutes simply become a ritual at the beginning of a larger
routine. This is not merely a hack to make habits easier but
actually the ideal way to master a diﬀicult skill. The more
you ritualize the beginning of a process, the more likely it
becomes that you can slip into the state of deep focus that
is required to do great things. By doing the same warm-up
before every workout, you make it easier to get into a state
of peak performance. By following the same creative ritual,
you make it easier to get into the hard work of creating. By
developing a consistent power-down habit, you make it
easier to get to bed at a reasonable time each night. Y ou
may not be able to automate the whole process, but you
can make the ﬁrst action mindless. Make it easy to start
and the rest will follow .
The T wo-Minute Rule can seem like a trick to some
people. Y ou know that the real goal is to do more than just
two minutes, so it may feel like you’re trying to fool
yourself . Nobody is actually aspiring to read one page or do
one push-up or open their notes. And if you know it’s a
mental trick, why would you fall for it?
If the T wo-Minute Rule feels forced, try this: do it for two
minutes and then stop. Go for a run, but you must  stop
after two minutes. Start meditating, but you must  stop after
two minutes. Study Arabic, but you must  stop after two
minutes. It’s not a strategy for starting, it’s the whole
thing. Y our habit can only last one hundred and twenty
seconds.
One of my readers used this strategy to lose over one
hundred pounds. In the beginning, he went to the gym each
day, but he told himself he wasn’t allowed to stay for more
than ﬁve minutes. He would go to the gym, exercise for ﬁve
minutes, and leave as soon as his time was up. A fter a few
weeks, he looked around and thought, “ Well, I’m always
coming here anyway . I might as well start staying a little
longer .” A few years later , the weight was gone.
Journaling provides another example. Nearly everyone
can beneﬁt from getting their thoughts out of their head
and onto paper , but most people give up after a few days or
avoid it entirely because journaling feels like a chore. * The
secret is to always stay below the point where it feels like
work. Greg McK eown, a leadership consultant from the
United Kingdom, built a daily journaling habit by
speciﬁcally writing less than he felt like. He always stopped
journaling before it seemed like a hassle. Ernest
Hemingway believed in similar advice for any kind of
writing. “The best way is to always stop when you are
going good,” he said.
Strategies like this work for another reason, too: they
reinforce the identity you want to build. If you show up at
the gym ﬁve days in a row—even if it’s just for two minutes
—you are casting votes for your new identity . You’re not
worried about getting in shape. Y ou’re focused on
becoming the type of person who doesn’t miss workouts.
You’re taking the smallest action that conﬁrms the type of
person you want to be.
We rarely think about change this way because everyone
is consumed by the end goal. But one push-up is better
than not exercising. One minute of guitar practice is better
than none at all. One minute of reading is better than never
picking up a book. It’s better to do less than you hoped
than to do nothing at all.
At some point, once you’ve established the habit and
you’re showing up each day , you can combine the T wo-
Minute Rule with a technique we call habit shaping  to scale
your habit back up toward your ultimate goal. Start by
mastering the ﬁrst two minutes of the smallest version of
the behavior . Then, advance to an intermediate step and
repeat the process—focusing on just the ﬁrst two minutes
and mastering that stage before moving on to the next
level. Eventually , you’ll end up with the habit you had
originally hoped to build while still keeping your focus
where it should be: on the ﬁrst two minutes of the behavior .
EXAMPLES OF HABIT SHAPING
Becoming an Early Riser
Phase 1: Be home by 10 p.m. every night.
Phase 2: Have all devices (TV, phone, etc.) tur ned oﬀ by 10 p.m. every night.
Phase 3: Be in bed by 10 p.m. every night (r eading a book, talking with your
partner).
Phase 4: Lights oﬀ by 10 p.m. every night.
Phase 5: Wake up at 6 a.m. every day .
Becoming V egan
Phase 1: Start eating vegetables at each meal.
Phase 2: Stop eating animals with four legs (cow, pig, lamb, etc.).
Phase 3: Stop eating animals with two legs (chick en, turk ey, etc.).
Phase 4: Stop eating animals with no legs (ﬁsh, clams, scallops, etc.).
Phase 5: Stop eating all animal pr oducts (eggs, milk, cheese).
Starting to Exercise
Phase 1: Change into work out clothes.
Phase 2: Step out the door (try taking a walk).
Phase 3: Drive to the gym, e xercise for ﬁve minutes, and leave.
Phase 4: Exercise for ﬁf teen minutes at least once per week.
Phase 5: Exercise thr ee times per week.
Nearly any larger life goal can be transformed into a
two-minute behavior . I want to live a healthy and long life >
I need to stay in shape > I need to exercise > I need to
change into my workout clothes. I want to have a happy
marriage > I need to be a good partner > I should do
something each day to make my partner’s life easier > I
should meal plan for next week.
Whenever you are struggling to stick with a habit, you
can employ the T wo-Minute Rule. It’s a simple way to make
your habits easy .
Chapter Summary
Habits can be completed in a few seconds but continue
to impact your behavior for minutes or hours
afterward.
Many habits occur at decisive moments—choices that
are like a fork in the road—and either send you in the
direction of a productive day or an unproductive one.
The T wo-Minute Rule states, “ When you start a new
habit, it should take less than two minutes to do .”
The more you ritualize the beginning of a process, the
more likely it becomes that you can slip into the state
of deep focus that is required to do great things.
Standardize before you optimize. Y ou can’t improve a
habit that doesn’t exist.