I
14
How to Mak e Good Habits Inevitable and Bad Habits
Impossible
N THE SUMMER OF 1830, Victor Hugo was facing an
impossible deadline. T welve months earlier , the French
author had promised his publisher a new book. But instead
of writing, he spent that year pursuing other projects,
entertaining guests, and delaying his work. Frustrated,
Hugo’s publisher responded by setting a deadline less than
six months away . The book had to be ﬁnished by F ebruary
1831.
Hugo concocted a strange plan to beat his
procrastination. He collected all of his clothes and asked an
assistant to lock them away in a large chest. He was left
with nothing to wear except a large shawl. Lacking any
suitable clothing to go outdoors, he remained in his study
and wrote furiously during the fall and winter of 1830. The
Hunchback of Notre Dame  was published two weeks early
on January 14, 1831. *
Sometimes success is less about making good habits
easy and more about making bad habits hard. This is an
inversion of the 3rd Law of Behavior Change: make it
diﬀicult . If you ﬁnd yourself continually struggling to follow
through on your plans, then you can take a page from
Victor Hugo and make your bad habits more diﬀicult by
creating what psychologists call a commitment device .
A commitment device is a choice you make in the present
that controls your actions in the future. It is a way to lock
in future behavior , bind you to good habits, and restrict you
from bad ones. When V ictor Hugo shut his clothes away so
he could focus on writing, he was creating a commitment
device. *
There are many ways to create a commitment device.
You can reduce overeating by purchasing food in individual
packages rather than in bulk size. Y ou can voluntarily ask
to be added to the banned list at casinos and online poker
sites to prevent future gambling sprees. I’ve even heard of
athletes who have to “make weight” for a competition
choosing to leave their wallets at home during the week
before weigh-in so they won’t be tempted to buy fast food.
As another example, my friend and fellow habits expert
Nir Eyal purchased an outlet timer , which is an adapter
that he plugged in between his internet router and the
power outlet. A t 10 p.m. each night, the outlet timer cuts
oﬀ the power to the router . When the internet goes oﬀ ,
everyone knows it is time to go to bed.
Commitment devices are useful because they enable you
to take advantage of good intentions before you can fall
victim to temptation. Whenever I’m looking to cut calories,
for example, I will ask the waiter to split my meal and box
half of it to go before  the meal is served. If I waited until
the meal came out and told myself “I’ll just eat half ,” it
would never work.
The key is to change the task such that it requires more
work to get out of the good habit than to get started on it.
If you’re feeling motivated to get in shape, schedule a yoga
session and pay ahead of time. If you’re excited about the
business you want to start, email an entrepreneur you
respect and set up a consulting call. When the time comes
to act, the only way to bail is to cancel the meeting, which
requires eﬀort and may cost money .
Commitment devices increase the odds that you’ll do the
right thing in the future by making bad habits diﬀicult in
the present. However , we can do even better . We can make
good habits inevitable and bad habits impossible.
HOW TO A UTOMA TE A HABIT AND NEVER THINK
ABOUT IT AGAIN
John Henry P atterson was born in Dayton, Ohio, in 1844.
He spent his childhood doing chores on the family farm and
working shifts at his father’s sawmill. A fter attending
college at Dartmouth, P atterson returned to Ohio and
opened a small supply store for coal miners.
It seemed like a good opportunity . The store faced little
competition and enjoyed a steady stream of customers, but
still struggled to make money . That was when P atterson
discovered his employees were stealing from him.
In the mid-1800s, employee theft was a common
problem. Receipts were kept in an open drawer and could
easily be altered or discarded. There were no video
cameras to review behavior and no software to track
transactions. Unless you were willing to hover over your
employees every minute of the day , or to manage all
transactions yourself , it was diﬀicult to prevent theft.
As Patterson mulled over his predicament, he came
across an advertisement for a new invention called Ritty’s
Incorruptible Cashier . Designed by fellow Dayton resident
James Ritty , it was the ﬁrst cash register . The machine
automatically locked the cash and receipts inside after each
transaction. P atterson bought two for ﬁfty dollars each.
Employee theft at his store vanished overnight. In the
next six months, Patterson’s business went from losing
money to making $5,000 in proﬁt—the equivalent of more
than $100,000 today .
Patterson was so impressed with the machine that he
changed businesses. He bought the rights to Ritty’s
invention and opened the National Cash Register Company .
Ten years later , National Cash Register had over one
thousand employees and was on its way to becoming one of
the most successful businesses of its time.
The best way to break a bad habit is to make it
impractical to do . Increase the friction until you don’t even
have the option to act. The brilliance of the cash register
was that it automated ethical behavior by making stealing
practically impossible. R ather than trying to change the
employees, it made the preferred behavior automatic.
Some actions—like installing a cash register—pay oﬀ
again and again. These onetime choices require a little bit
of eﬀort up front but create increasing value over time. I’m
fascinated by the idea that a single choice can deliver
returns again and again, and I surveyed my readers on
their favorite onetime actions that lead to better long-term
habits. The table on the following page shares some of the
most popular answers.
I’d wager that if the average person were to simply do
half of the onetime actions on this list—even if they didn’t
give another thought to their habits—most would ﬁnd
themselves living a better life a year from now . These
onetime actions are a straightforward way to employ the
3rd Law of Behavior Change. They make it easier to sleep
well, eat healthy , be productive, save money , and generally
live better .
ONETIME ACTIONS THA T LOCK IN GOOD HABITS
Nutrition
Buy a water ﬁlter to clean your drinking water .
Use smaller plates to r educe caloric intak e.
Sleep
Buy a good mattr ess.
Get black out curtains.
Remove your television fr om your bedr oom.
Productivity
Unsubscribe fr om emails.
Turn oﬀ notiﬁcations and mute gr oup chats.
Set your phone to silent.
Use email ﬁlters to clear up your inbo x.
Delete games and social media apps on your phone.
Happiness
Get a dog.
Move to a friendly, social neighbor hood.
General Health
Get vaccinated.
Buy good shoes to avoid back pain.
Buy a supportive chair or standing desk.
Finance
Enroll in an automatic savings plan.
Set up automatic bill pay .
Cut cable service.
Ask service pr oviders to lower your bills.
Of course, there are many ways to automate good habits
and eliminate bad ones. Typically , they involve putting
technology to work for you. T echnology can transform
actions that were once hard, annoying, and complicated
into behaviors that are easy , painless, and simple. It is the
most reliable and eﬀective way to guarantee the right
behavior .
This is particularly useful for behaviors that happen too
infrequently to become habitual. Things you have to do
monthly or yearly—like rebalancing your investment
portfolio—are never repeated frequently enough to become
a habit, so they beneﬁt in particular from technology
“remembering” to do them for you.
Other examples include:
Medicine: Prescriptions can be automatically reﬁlled.
Personal ﬁnance: Employees can save for retirement
with an automatic wage deduction.
Cooking: Meal-delivery services can do your grocery
shopping.
Productivity: Social media browsing can be cut oﬀ with
a website blocker .
When you automate as much of your life as possible, you
can spend your eﬀort on the tasks machines cannot do yet.
Each habit that we hand over to the authority of technology
frees up time and energy to pour into the next stage of
growth. As mathematician and philosopher Alfred North
Whitehead wrote, “ Civilization advances by extending the
number of operations we can perform without thinking
about them.”
Of course, the power of technology can work against us
as well. Binge-watching becomes a habit because you have
to put more eﬀort in to stop looking at the screen than to
continue doing so . Instead of pressing a button to advance
to the next episode, Netﬂix or Y ouTube will autoplay it for
you. All you have to do is keep your eyes open.
Technology creates a level of convenience that enables
you to act on your smallest whims and desires. A t the mere
suggestion of hunger , you can have food delivered to your
door. At the slightest hint of boredom, you can get lost in
the vast expanse of social media. When the eﬀort required
to act on your desires becomes eﬀectively zero, you can
ﬁnd yourself slipping into whatever impulse arises at the
moment. The downside of automation is that we can ﬁnd
ourselves jumping from easy task to easy task without
making time for more diﬀicult, but ultimately more
rewarding, work.
I often ﬁnd myself gravitating toward social media
during any downtime. If I feel bored for just a fraction of a
second, I reach for my phone. It’s easy to write oﬀ these
minor distractions as “just taking a break,” but over time
they can accumulate into a serious issue. The constant tug
of “just one more minute” can prevent me from doing
anything of consequence. (I’m not the only one. The
average person spends over two hours per day on social
media. What could you do with an extra six hundred hours
per year?)
During the year I was writing this book, I experimented
with a new time management strategy . Every Monday , my
assistant would reset the passwords on all my social media
accounts, which logged me out on each device. All week I
worked without distraction. On Friday , she would send me
the new passwords. I had the entire weekend to enjoy what
social media had to oﬀer until Monday morning when she
would do it again. (If you don’t have an assistant, team up
with a friend or family member and reset each other’s
passwords each week.)
One of the biggest surprises was how quickly I adapted.
Within the ﬁrst week of locking myself out of social media, I
realized that I didn’t need to check it nearly as often as I
had been, and I certainly didn’t need it each day . It had
simply been so easy that it had become the default. Once
my bad habit became impossible, I discovered that I did
actually have the motivation to work on more meaningful
tasks. A fter I removed the mental candy from my
environment, it became much easier to eat the healthy
stuﬀ.
When working in your favor , automation can make your
good habits inevitable and your bad habits impossible. It is
the ultimate way to lock in future behavior rather than
relying on willpower in the moment. By utilizing
commitment devices, strategic onetime decisions, and
technology , you can create an environment of inevitability—
a space where good habits are not just an outcome you
hope for but an outcome that is virtually guaranteed.
Chapter Summary
The inversion of the 3rd Law of Behavior Change is
make it diﬀicult .
A commitment device is a choice you make in the
present that locks in better behavior in the future.
The ultimate way to lock in future behavior is to
automate your habits.
Onetime choices—like buying a better mattress or
enrolling in an automatic savings plan—are single
actions that automate your future habits and deliver
increasing returns over time.
Using technology to automate your habits is the most
reliable and eﬀective way to guarantee the right
behavior .
HOW TO CREA TE A GOOD HABIT
The 1st Law: Mak e It Obvious
1.1: Fill out the Habits Scor ecard. Write down your cur rent habits to become
awar e of them.
1.2: Use implementation intentions: “I will [BEHA VIOR] at [TIME] in
[LOCATION].”
1.3: Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].”
1.4: Design your envir onment. Mak e the cues of good habits obvious and
visible.
The 2nd Law: Mak e It Attractive
2.1: Use temptation bundling. P air an action you want  to do with an action you
need  to do .
2.2: Join a cultur e wher e your desir ed behavior is the nor mal behavior .
2.3: Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately befor e a
diﬃcult habit.
The 3rd Law: Mak e It Easy
3.1: Reduce friction. Decr ease the number of steps between you and your
good habits.
3.2: Prime the envir onment. P repare your envir onment to mak e futur e actions
easier .
3.3: Master the decisive moment. Optimize the small choices that deliver
outsized impact.
3.4: Use the T wo-Minute R ule. Downscale your habits until they can be done in
two minutes or less.
3.5: Automate your habits. Invest in technology and onetime pur chases that
lock in futur e behavior .
The 4th Law: Mak e It Satisfying
HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT
Inversion of the 1st Law: Mak e It Invisible
1.5: Reduce e xposur e. Remove the cues of your bad habits fr om your
envir onment.
Inversion of the 2nd Law: Mak e It Unattractive
2.4: Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the beneﬁts of avoiding your bad habits.
Inversion of the 3rd Law: Mak e It Diﬃcult
3.6: Increase friction. Incr ease the number of steps between you and your bad
habits.
3.7: Use a commitment device. R estrict your futur e choices to the ones that
beneﬁt you.
Inversion of the 4th Law: Mak e It Unsatisfying
You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at:
atomichabits.com/cheatsheet