I
15
The Car dinal R ule of Behavior Change
N THE LA TE 1990 S, a public health worker named Stephen
Luby left his hometown of Omaha, Nebraska, and bought
a one-way ticket to Karachi, P akistan.
Karachi was one of the most populous cities in the world.
By 1998, over nine million people called it home. It was the
economic center of P akistan and a transportation hub, with
some of the most active airports and seaports in the region.
In the commercial parts of town, you could ﬁnd all of the
standard urban amenities and bustling downtown streets.
But Karachi was also one of the least  livable cities in the
world.
Over 60 percent of Karachi’s residents lived in squatter
settlements and slums. These densely packed
neighborhoods were ﬁlled with makeshift houses cobbled
together from old boards, cinder blocks, and other
discarded materials. There was no waste removal system,
no electricity grid, no clean water supply . When dry , the
streets were a combination of dust and trash. When wet,
they became a muddy pit of sewage. Mosquito colonies
thrived in pools of stagnant water , and children played
among the garbage.
The unsanitary conditions lead to widespread illness and
disease. Contaminated water sources caused epidemics of
diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Nearly one third of
the children living there were malnourished. W ith so many
people crammed into such a small space, viruses and
bacterial infections spread rapidly . It was this public health
crisis that had brought Stephen Luby to P akistan.
Luby and his team realized that in an environment with
poor sanitation, the simple habit of washing your hands
could make a real diﬀerence in the health of the residents.
But they soon discovered that many people were already
aware that handwashing was important.
And yet, despite this knowledge, many residents were
washing their hands in a haphazard fashion. Some people
would just run their hands under the water quickly . Others
would only wash one hand. Many would simply forget to
wash their hands before preparing food. Everyone said
handwashing was important, but few people made a habit
out of it. The problem wasn’t knowledge. The problem was
consistency .
That was when Luby and his team partnered with
Procter & Gamble to supply the neighborhood with
Safeguard soap. Compared to your standard bar of soap,
using Safeguard was a more enjoyable experience.
“In Pakistan, Safeguard was a premium soap,” Luby told
me. “The study participants commonly mentioned how
much they liked it.” The soap foamed easily , and people
were able to lather their hands with suds. It smelled great.
Instantly , handwashing became slightly more pleasurable.
“I see the goal of handwashing promotion not as
behavior change but as habit adoption,” Luby said. “It is a
lot easier for people to adopt a product that provides a
strong positive sensory signal, for example the mint taste of
toothpaste, than it is to adopt a habit that does not provide
pleasurable sensory feedback, like ﬂossing one’s teeth. The
marketing team at Procter & Gamble talked about trying to
create a positive handwashing experience.”
Within months, the researchers saw a rapid shift in the
health of children in the neighborhood. The rate of diarrhea
fell by 52 percent; pneumonia by 48 percent; and impetigo,
a bacterial skin infection, by 35 percent.
The long-term eﬀects were even better . “We went back
to some of the households in Karachi six years after ,” Luby
told me. “ Over 95 percent of households who had been
given the soap for free and encouraged to wash their hands
had a handwashing station with soap and water available
when our study team visited. . . . W e had not given any soap
to the intervention group for over ﬁve years, but during the
trial they had become so habituated to wash their hands,
that they had maintained the practice.” It was a powerful
example of the fourth and ﬁnal Law of Behavior Change:
make it satisfying.
We are more likely to repeat a behavior when the
experience is satisfying. This is entirely logical. F eelings of
pleasure—even minor ones like washing your hands with
soap that smells nice and lathers well—are signals that tell
the brain: “This feels good. Do this again, next time.”
Pleasure teaches your brain that a behavior is worth
remembering and repeating.
Take the story of chewing gum. Chewing gum had been
sold commercially throughout the 1800s, but it wasn’t until
Wrigley launched in 1891 that it became a worldwide habit.
Early versions were made from relatively bland resins—
chewy , but not tasty . Wrigley revolutionized the industry by
adding ﬂavors like Spearmint and Juicy Fruit, which made
the product ﬂavorful and fun to use. Then they went a step
further and began pushing chewing gum as a pathway to a
clean mouth. Advertisements told readers to “Refresh Y our
Taste.”
Tasty ﬂavors and the feeling of a fresh mouth provided
little bits of immediate reinforcement and made the
product satisfying to use. Consumption skyrocketed, and
Wrigley became the largest chewing gum company in the
world.
Toothpaste had a similar trajectory . Manufacturers
enjoyed great success when they added ﬂavors like
spearmint, peppermint, and cinnamon to their products.
These ﬂavors don’t improve the eﬀectiveness of toothpaste.
They simply create a “clean mouth” feel and make the
experience of brushing your teeth more pleasurable. My
wife actually stopped using Sensodyne because she didn’t
like the aftertaste. She switched to a brand with a stronger
mint ﬂavor , which proved to be more satisfying.
Conversely , if an experience is not satisfying, we have
little reason to repeat it. In my research, I came across the
story of a woman who had a narcissistic relative who drove
her nuts. In an attempt to spend less time with this
egomaniac, she acted as dull and as boring as possible
whenever he was around. W ithin a few encounters, he
started avoiding her because he found her so uninteresting.
Stories like these are evidence of the Cardinal Rule of
Behavior Change: What is rewarded is repeated. What is
punished is avoided.  You learn what to do in the future
based on what you were rewarded for doing (or punished
for doing) in the past. P ositive emotions cultivate habits.
Negative emotions destroy them.
The ﬁrst three laws of behavior change— make it obvious,
make it attractive, and make it easy —increase the odds
that a behavior will be performed this time. The fourth law
of behavior change— make it satisfying —increases the odds
that a behavior will be repeated next time. It completes the
habit loop.
But there is a trick. W e are not looking for just any type
of satisfaction. W e are looking for immediate satisfaction.
THE MISMA TCH BETWEEN IMMEDIA TE AND DELA YED
REWARDS
Imagine you’re an animal roaming the plains of A frica—a
giraﬀe or an elephant or a lion. On any given day , most of
your decisions have an immediate impact. Y ou are always
thinking about what to eat or where to sleep or how to
avoid a predator . You are constantly focused on the present
or the very near future. Y ou live in what scientists call an
immediate-return environment  because your actions
instantly deliver clear and immediate outcomes.
Now switch back to your human self . In modern society ,
many of the choices you make today will not beneﬁt you
immediately . If you do a good job at work, you’ll get a
paycheck in a few weeks. If you exercise today , perhaps you
won’t be overweight next year . If you save money now ,
maybe you’ll have enough for retirement decades from
now. You live in what scientists call a delayed-return
environment  because you can work for years before your
actions deliver the intended payoﬀ .
The human brain did not evolve for life in a delayed-
return environment. The earliest remains of modern
humans, known as Homo sapiens sapiens , are
approximately two hundred thousand years old. These were
the ﬁrst humans to have a brain relatively similar to ours.
In particular , the neocortex—the newest part of the brain
and the region responsible for higher functions like
language—was roughly the same size two hundred
thousand years ago as today . You are walking around with
the same hardware as your P aleolithic ancestors.
It is only recently—during the last ﬁve hundred years or
so—that society has shifted to a predominantly delayed-
return environment. * Compared to the age of the brain,
modern society is brand-new . In the last one hundred years,
we have seen the rise of the car , the airplane, the
television, the personal computer , the internet, the
smartphone, and Beyoncé. The world has changed much in
recent years, but human nature has changed little.
Similar to other animals on the A frican savannah, our
ancestors spent their days responding to grave threats,
securing the next meal, and taking shelter from a storm. It
made sense to place a high value on instant gratiﬁcation.
The distant future was less of a concern. And after
thousands of generations in an immediate-return
environment, our brains evolved to prefer quick payoﬀs to
long-term ones.
Behavioral economists refer to this tendency as time
inconsistency . That is, the way your brain evaluates
rewards is inconsistent across time. * You value the present
more than the future. Usually , this tendency serves us well.
A reward that is certain  right now is typically worth more
than one that is merely possible  in the future. But
occasionally , our bias toward instant gratiﬁcation causes
problems.
Why would someone smoke if they know it increases the
risk of lung cancer? Why would someone overeat when they
know it increases their risk of obesity? Why would someone
have unsafe sex if they know it can result in sexually
transmitted disease? Once you understand how the brain
prioritizes rewards, the answers become clear: the
consequences of bad habits are delayed while the rewards
are immediate. Smoking might kill you in ten years, but it
reduces stress and eases your nicotine cravings now.
Overeating is harmful in the long run but appetizing in the
moment. Sex—safe or not—provides pleasure right away .
Disease and infection won’t show up for days or weeks,
even years.
Every habit produces multiple outcomes across time.
Unfortunately , these outcomes are often misaligned. W ith
our bad habits, the immediate outcome usually feels good,
but the ultimate outcome feels bad. W ith good habits, it is
the reverse: the immediate outcome is unenjoyable, but the
ultimate outcome feels good. The French economist
Frédéric Bastiat explained the problem clearly when he
wrote, “It almost always happens that when the immediate
consequence is favorable, the later consequences are
disastrous, and vice versa. . . . Often, the sweeter the ﬁrst
fruit of a habit, the more bitter are its later fruits.”
Put another way , the costs of your good habits are in the
present. The costs of your bad habits are in the future.
The brain’s tendency to prioritize the present moment
means you can’t rely on good intentions. When you make a
plan—to lose weight, write a book, or learn a language—
you are actually making plans for your future self . And
when you envision what you want your life to be like, it is
easy to see the value in taking actions with long-term
beneﬁts. W e all want better lives for our future selves.
However , when the moment of decision arrives, instant
gratiﬁcation usually wins. Y ou are no longer making a
choice for Future Y ou, who dreams of being ﬁtter or
wealthier or happier . You are choosing for Present Y ou, who
wants to be full, pampered, and entertained. As a general
rule, the more immediate pleasure you get from an action,
the more strongly you should question whether it aligns
with your long-term goals. *
With a fuller understanding of what causes our brain to
repeat some behaviors and avoid others, let’s update the
Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change: What is immediately
rewarded is repeated. What is immediately  punished is
avoided.
Our preference for instant gratiﬁcation reveals an
important truth about success: because of how we are
wired, most people will spend all day chasing quick hits of
satisfaction. The road less traveled is the road of delayed
gratiﬁcation. If you’re willing to wait for the rewards, you’ll
face less competition and often get a bigger payoﬀ . As the
saying goes, the last mile is always the least crowded.
This is precisely what research has shown. People who
are better at delaying gratiﬁcation have higher SA T scores,
lower levels of substance abuse, lower likelihood of obesity ,
better responses to stress, and superior social skills. W e’ve
all seen this play out in our own lives. If you delay watching
television and get your homework done, you’ll generally
learn more and get better grades. If you don’t buy desserts
and chips at the store, you’ll often eat healthier food when
you get home. A t some point, success in nearly every ﬁeld
requires you to ignore an immediate reward in favor of a
delayed reward.
Here’s the problem: most people know  that delaying
gratiﬁcation is the wise approach. They want the beneﬁts
of good habits: to be healthy , productive, at peace. But
these outcomes are seldom top-of -mind at the decisive
moment. Thankfully , it’s possible to train yourself to delay
gratiﬁcation—but you need to work with the grain of
human nature, not against it. The best way to do this is to
add a little bit of immediate pleasure to the habits that pay
oﬀ in the long-run and a little bit of immediate pain to ones
that don’t.
HOW TO TURN INST ANT GRA TIFICA TION TO Y OUR
ADVANTAGE
The vital thing in getting a habit to stick is to feel
successful—even if it’s in a small way . The feeling of
success is a signal that your habit paid oﬀ and that the
work was worth the eﬀort.
In a perfect world, the reward for a good habit is the
habit itself . In the real world, good habits tend to feel
worthwhile only after they have provided you with
something. Early on, it’s all sacriﬁce. Y ou’ve gone to the
gym a few times, but you’re not stronger or ﬁtter or faster
—at least, not in any noticeable sense. It’s only months
later, once you shed a few pounds or your arms gain some
deﬁnition, that it becomes easier to exercise for its own
sake. In the beginning, you need a reason to stay on track.
This is why immediate rewards are essential. They keep
you excited while the delayed rewards accumulate in the
background.
What we’re really talking about here—when we’re
discussing immediate rewards—is the ending of a behavior .
The ending of any experience is vital because we tend to
remember it more than other phases. Y ou want the ending
of your habit to be satisfying. The best approach is to use
reinforcement , which refers to the process of using an
immediate reward to increase the rate of a behavior . Habit
stacking, which we covered in Chapter 5, ties your habit to
an immediate cue, which makes it obvious when to start.
Reinforcement ties your habit to an immediate reward,
which makes it satisfying when you ﬁnish.
Immediate reinforcement can be especially helpful when
dealing with habits of avoidance , which are behaviors you
want to stop doing. It can be challenging to stick with
habits like “no frivolous purchases” or “no alcohol this
month” because nothing happens when you skip happy
hour drinks or don’t buy that pair of shoes. It can be hard
to feel satisﬁed when there is no action in the ﬁrst place.
All you’re doing is resisting temptation, and there isn’t
much satisfying about that.
One solution is to turn the situation on its head. Y ou want
to make avoidance visible. Open a savings account and
label it for something you want—maybe “Leather Jacket.”
Whenever you pass on a purchase, put the same amount of
money in the account. Skip your morning latte? Transfer
$5. P ass on another month of Netﬂix? Move $10 over . It’s
like creating a loyalty program for yourself . The immediate
reward of seeing yourself save money toward the leather
jacket feels a lot better than being deprived. Y ou are
making it satisfying to do nothing.
One of my readers and his wife used a similar setup.
They wanted to stop eating out so much and start cooking
together more. They labeled their savings account “Trip to
Europe.” Whenever they skipped going out to eat, they
transferred $50 into the account. A t the end of the year ,
they put the money toward the vacation.
It is worth noting that it is important to select short-term
rewards that reinforce your identity rather than ones that
conﬂict with it. Buying a new jacket is ﬁne if you’re trying
to lose weight or read more books, but it doesn’t work if
you’re trying to budget and save money . Instead, taking a
bubble bath or going on a leisurely walk are good examples
of rewarding yourself with free time, which aligns with
your ultimate goal of more freedom and ﬁnancial
independence. Similarly , if your reward for exercising is
eating a bowl of ice cream, then you’re casting votes for
conﬂicting identities, and it ends up being a wash. Instead,
maybe your reward is a massage, which is both a luxury
and a vote toward taking care of your body . Now the short-
term reward is aligned with your long-term vision of being
a healthy person.
Eventually , as intrinsic rewards like a better mood, more
energy , and reduced stress kick in, you’ll become less
concerned with chasing the secondary reward. The identity
itself becomes the reinforcer . You do it because it’s who you
are and it feels good to be you. The more a habit becomes
part of your life, the less you need outside encouragement
to follow through. Incentives can start a habit. Identity
sustains a habit.
That said, it takes time for the evidence to accumulate
and a new identity to emerge. Immediate reinforcement
helps maintain motivation in the short term while you’re
waiting for the long-term rewards to arrive.
In summary , a habit needs to be enjoyable for it to last.
Simple bits of reinforcement—like soap that smells great or
toothpaste that has a refreshing mint ﬂavor or seeing $50
hit your savings account—can oﬀer the immediate pleasure
you need to enjoy a habit. And change is easy when it is
enjoyable.
Chapter Summary
The 4th Law of Behavior Change is make it satisfying .
We are more likely to repeat a behavior when the
experience is satisfying.
The human brain evolved to prioritize immediate
rewards over delayed rewards.
The Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change: What is
immediately rewarded is repeated. What is
immediately punished is avoided.
To get a habit to stick you need to feel immediately
successful—even if it’s in a small way .
The ﬁrst three laws of behavior change— make it
obvious, make it attractive, and make it easy —increase
the odds that a behavior will be performed this time.
The fourth law of behavior change— make it satisfying
—increases the odds that a behavior will be repeated
next time.