I
16
How to Stick with Good Habits Every Day
N 1993 , a bank in Abbotsford, Canada, hired a twenty-
three-year-old stockbroker named Trent Dyrsmid.
Abbotsford was a relatively small suburb, tucked away in
the shadow of nearby V ancouver , where most of the big
business deals were being made. Given the location, and
the fact that Dyrsmid was a rookie, nobody expected too
much of him. But he made brisk progress thanks to a
simple daily habit.
Dyrsmid began each morning with two jars on his desk.
One was ﬁlled with 120 paper clips. The other was empty .
As soon as he settled in each day , he would make a sales
call. Immediately after , he would move one paper clip from
the full jar to the empty jar and the process would begin
again. “Every morning I would start with 120 paper clips in
one jar and I would keep dialing the phone until I had
moved them all to the second jar ,” he told me.
Within eighteen months, Dyrsmid was bringing in $5
million to the ﬁrm. By age twenty-four , he was making
$75,000 per year—the equivalent of $125,000 today . Not
long after , he landed a six -ﬁgure job with another company .
I like to refer to this technique as the P aper Clip Strategy
and, over the years, I’ve heard from readers who have
employed it in a variety of ways. One woman shifted a
hairpin from one container to another whenever she wrote
a page of her book. Another man moved a marble from one
bin to the next after each set of push-ups.
Making progress is satisfying, and visual measures—like
moving paper clips or hairpins or marbles—provide clear
evidence of your progress. As a result, they reinforce your
behavior and add a little bit of immediate satisfaction to
any activity . Visual measurement comes in many forms:
food journals, workout logs, loyalty punch cards, the
progress bar on a software download, even the page
numbers in a book. But perhaps the best way to measure
your progress is with a habit tracker .
HOW TO KEEP Y OUR HABITS ON TRACK
A habit tracker is a simple way to measure whether you did
a habit. The most basic format is to get a calendar and
cross oﬀ each day you stick with your routine. F or example,
if you meditate on Monday , Wednesday , and Friday , each of
those dates gets an X. As time rolls by , the calendar
becomes a record of your habit streak.
Countless people have tracked their habits, but perhaps
the most famous was Benjamin Franklin. Beginning at age
twenty , Franklin carried a small booklet everywhere he
went and used it to track thirteen personal virtues. This list
included goals like “Lose no time. Be always employed in
something useful” and “ Avoid triﬂing conversation.” A t the
end of each day , Franklin would open his booklet and
record his progress.
Jerry Seinfeld reportedly uses a habit tracker to stick
with his streak of writing jokes. In the documentary
Comedian , he explains that his goal is simply to “never
break the chain” of writing jokes every day . In other words,
he is not focused on how good or bad a particular joke is or
how inspired he feels. He is simply focused on showing up
and adding to his streak.
“Don’t break the chain” is a powerful mantra. Don’t
break the chain of sales calls and you’ll build a successful
book of business. Don’t break the chain of workouts and
you’ll get ﬁt faster than you’d expect. Don’t break the chain
of creating every day and you will end up with an
impressive portfolio . Habit tracking is powerful because it
leverages multiple Laws of Behavior Change. It
simultaneously makes a behavior obvious, attractive, and
satisfying.
Let’s break down each one.
Beneﬁt #1: Habit tracking is obvious.
Recording your last action creates a trigger that can
initiate your next one. Habit tracking naturally builds a
series of visual cues like the streak of X’s on your calendar
or the list of meals in your food log. When you look at the
calendar and see your streak, you’ll be reminded to act
again. Research has shown that people who track their
progress on goals like losing weight, quitting smoking, and
lowering blood pressure are all more likely to improve than
those who don’t. One study of more than sixteen hundred
people found that those who kept a daily food log lost twice
as much weight as those who did not. The mere act of
tracking a behavior can spark the urge to change it.
Habit tracking also keeps you honest. Most of us have a
distorted view of our own behavior . We think we act better
than we do . Measurement oﬀers one way to overcome our
blindness to our own behavior and notice what’s really
going on each day . One glance at the paper clips in the
container and you immediately know how much work you
have (or haven’t) been putting in. When the evidence is
right in front of you, you’re less likely to lie to yourself .
Beneﬁt #2: Habit tracking is attractive.
The most eﬀective form of motivation is progress. When we
get a signal that we are moving forward, we become more
motivated to continue down that path. In this way , habit
tracking can have an addictive eﬀect on motivation. Each
small win feeds your desire.
This can be particularly powerful on a bad day . When
you’re feeling down, it’s easy to forget about all the
progress you have already made. Habit tracking provides
visual proof of your hard work—a subtle reminder of how
far you’ve come. Plus, the empty square you see each
morning can motivate you to get started because you don’t
want to lose your progress by breaking the streak.
Beneﬁt #3: Habit tracking is satisf ying.
This is the most crucial beneﬁt of all. Tracking can become
its own form of reward. It is satisfying to cross an item oﬀ
your to-do list, to complete an entry in your workout log, or
to mark an X on the calendar . It feels good to watch your
results grow—the size of your investment portfolio, the
length of your book manuscript—and if it feels good, then
you’re more likely to endure.
Habit tracking also helps keep your eye on the ball:
you’re focused on the process rather than the result. Y ou’re
not ﬁxated on getting six -pack abs, you’re just trying to
keep the streak alive and become the type of person who
doesn’t miss workouts.
In summary , habit tracking (1) creates a visual cue that
can remind you to act, (2) is inherently motivating because
you see the progress you are making and don’t want to lose
it, and (3) feels satisfying whenever you record another
successful instance of your habit. Furthermore, habit
tracking provides visual proof that you are casting votes for
the type of person you wish to become, which is a delightful
form of immediate and intrinsic gratiﬁcation. *
You may be wondering, if habit tracking is so useful, why
have I waited so long to talk about it?
Despite all the beneﬁts, I’ve left this discussion until now
for a simple reason: many people resist the idea of tracking
and measuring. It can feel like a burden because it forces
you into two habits: the habit you’re trying to build and the
habit of tracking it. Counting calories sounds like a hassle
when you’re already struggling to follow a diet. W riting
down every sales call seems tedious when you’ve got work
to do . It feels easier to say , “I’ll just eat less.” Or , “I’ll try
harder .” Or, “I’ll remember to do it.” P eople inevitably tell
me things like, “I have a decision journal, but I wish I used
it more.” Or , “I recorded my workouts for a week, but then
quit.” I’ve been there myself . I once made a food log to
track my calories. I managed to do it for one meal  and then
gave up.
Tracking isn’t for everyone, and there is no need to
measure your entire life. But nearly anyone can beneﬁt
from it in some form—even if it’s only temporary .
What can we do to make tracking easier?
First, whenever possible, measurement should be
automated. Y ou’ll probably be surprised by how much
you’re already tracking without knowing it. Y our credit
card statement tracks how often you go out to eat. Y our
Fitbit registers how many steps you take and how long you
sleep. Y our calendar records how many new places you
travel to each year . Once you know where to get the data,
add a note to your calendar to review it each week or each
month, which is more practical than tracking it every day .
Second, manual tracking should be limited to your most
important habits. It is better to consistently track one habit
than to sporadically track ten.
Finally , record each measurement immediately after the
habit occurs. The completion of the behavior is the cue to
write it down. This approach allows you to combine the
habit-stacking method mentioned in Chapter 5 with habit
tracking.
The habit stacking + habit tracking formula is:
After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [TRACK MY
HABIT].
After I hang up the phone from a sales call, I will move
one paper clip over .
After I ﬁnish each set at the gym, I will record it in my
workout journal.
After I put my plate in the dishwasher , I will write
down what I ate.
These tactics can make tracking your habits easier . Even
if you aren’t the type of person who enjoys recording your
behavior , I think you’ll ﬁnd a few weeks of measurements
to be insightful. It’s always interesting to see how you’ve
actually  been spending your time.
That said, every habit streak ends at some point. And,
more important than any single measurement, is having a
good plan for when your habits slide oﬀ track.
HOW TO RECO VER QUICKL Y WHEN Y OUR HABITS
BREAK DOWN
No matter how consistent you are with your habits, it is
inevitable that life will interrupt you at some point.
Perfection is not possible. Before long, an emergency will
pop up—you get sick or you have to travel for work or your
family needs a little more of your time.
Whenever this happens to me, I try to remind myself of a
simple rule: never miss twice.
If I miss one day , I try to get back into it as quickly as
possible. Missing one workout happens, but I’m not going
to miss two in a row . Maybe I’ll eat an entire pizza, but I’ll
follow it up with a healthy meal. I can’t be perfect, but I
can avoid a second lapse. As soon as one streak ends, I get
started on the next one.
The ﬁrst mistake is never the one that ruins you. It is the
spiral of repeated mistakes that follows. Missing once is an
accident. Missing twice is the start of a new habit.
This is a distinguishing feature between winners and
losers. Anyone can have a bad performance, a bad workout,
or a bad day at work. But when successful people fail, they
rebound quickly . The breaking of a habit doesn’t matter if
the reclaiming of it is fast.
I think this principle is so important that I’ll stick to it
even if I can’t do a habit as well or as completely as I would
like. T oo often, we fall into an all-or-nothing cycle with our
habits. The problem is not slipping up; the problem is
thinking that if you can’t do something perfectly , then you
shouldn’t do it at all.
You don’t realize how valuable it is to just show up on
your bad (or busy) days. Lost days hurt you more than
successful days help you. If you start with $100, then a 50
percent gain will take you to $150. But you only need a 33
percent loss to take you back to $100. In other words,
avoiding a 33 percent loss is just as valuable as achieving a
50 percent gain. As Charlie Munger says, “The ﬁrst rule of
compounding: Never interrupt it unnecessarily .”
This is why the “bad” workouts are often the most
important ones. Sluggish days and bad workouts maintain
the compound gains you accrued from previous good days.
Simply doing something—ten squats, ﬁve sprints, a push-
up, anything really—is huge. Don’t put up a zero . Don’t let
losses eat into your compounding.
Furthermore, it’s not always about what happens during
the workout. It’s about being the type of person who
doesn’t miss workouts. It’s easy to train when you feel
good, but it’s crucial to show up when you don’t feel like it
—even if you do less than you hope. Going to the gym for
ﬁve minutes may not improve your performance, but it
reaﬀirms your identity .
The all-or-nothing cycle of behavior change is just one
pitfall that can derail your habits. Another potential danger
—especially if you are using a habit tracker—is measuring
the wrong thing.
KNOWING WHEN (AND WHEN NOT) TO TRACK A HABIT
Say you’re running a restaurant and you want to know if
your chef is doing a good job. One way to measure success
is to track how many customers pay for a meal each day . If
more customers come in, the food must be good. If fewer
customers come in, something must be wrong.
However , this one measurement—daily revenue—only
gives a limited picture of what’s really going on. Just
because someone pays for a meal doesn’t mean they enjoy
the meal. Even dissatisﬁed customers are unlikely to dine
and dash. In fact, if you’re only measuring revenue, the
food might be getting worse but you’re making up for it
with marketing or discounts or some other method.
Instead, it may be more eﬀective to track how many
customers ﬁnish  their meal or perhaps the percentage of
customers who leave a generous tip.
The dark side of tracking a particular behavior is that we
become driven by the number rather than the purpose
behind it. If your success is measured by quarterly
earnings, you will optimize sales, revenue, and accounting
for quarterly earnings. If your success is measured by a
lower number on the scale, you will optimize for a lower
number on the scale, even if that means embracing crash
diets, juice cleanses, and fat-loss pills. The human mind
wants to “win” whatever game is being played.
This pitfall is evident in many areas of life. W e focus on
working long hours instead of getting meaningful work
done. W e care more about getting ten thousand steps than
we do about being healthy . We teach for standardized tests
instead of emphasizing learning, curiosity , and critical
thinking. In short, we optimize for what we measure. When
we choose the wrong measurement, we get the wrong
behavior .
This is sometimes referred to as Goodhart’s Law . Named
after the economist Charles Goodhart, the principle states,
“When a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good
measure.” Measurement is only useful when it guides you
and adds context to a larger picture, not when it consumes
you. Each number is simply one piece of feedback in the
overall system.
In our data-driven world, we tend to overvalue numbers
and undervalue anything ephemeral, soft, and diﬀicult to
quantify . We mistakenly think the factors we can measure
are the only factors that exist. But just because you can
measure something doesn’t mean it’s the most important
thing. And just because you can’t  measure something
doesn’t mean it’s not important at all.
All of this to say , it’s crucial to keep habit tracking in its
proper place. It can feel satisfying to record a habit and
track your progress, but the measurement is not the only
thing that matters. Furthermore, there are many ways to
measure progress, and sometimes it helps to shift your
focus to something entirely diﬀerent.
This is why nonscale victories  can be eﬀective for weight
loss. The number on the scale may be stubborn, so if you
focus solely on that number , your motivation will sag. But
you may notice that your skin looks better or you wake up
earlier or your sex drive got a boost. All of these are valid
ways to track your improvement. If you’re not feeling
motivated by the number on the scale, perhaps it’s time to
focus on a diﬀerent measurement—one that gives you more
signals of progress.
No matter how you measure your improvement, habit
tracking oﬀers a simple way to make your habits more
satisfying. Each measurement provides a little bit of
evidence that you’re moving in the right direction and a
brief moment of immediate pleasure for a job well done.
Chapter Summary
One of the most satisfying feelings is the feeling of
making progress.
A habit tracker is a simple way to measure whether you
did a habit—like marking an X on a calendar .
Habit trackers and other visual forms of measurement
can make your habits satisfying by providing clear
evidence of your progress.
Don’t break the chain. Try to keep your habit streak
alive.
Never miss twice. If you miss one day , try to get back
on track as quickly as possible.
Just because you can measure something doesn’t mean
it’s the most important thing.