A
17
How an A ccountability P artner Can Change
Everything
FTER SER VING AS a pilot in W orld W ar II, Roger Fisher
attended Harvard Law School and spent thirty-four
years specializing in negotiation and conﬂict management.
He founded the Harvard Negotiation Project and worked
with numerous countries and world leaders on peace
resolutions, hostage crises, and diplomatic compromises.
But it was in the 1970s and 1980s, as the threat of nuclear
war escalated, that Fisher developed perhaps his most
interesting idea.
At the time, Fisher was focused on designing strategies
that could prevent nuclear war , and he had noticed a
troubling fact. Any sitting president would have access to
launch codes that could kill millions of people but would
never actually see anyone die because he would always be
thousands of miles away .
“My suggestion was quite simple,” he wrote in 1981.
“Put that [nuclear] code number in a little capsule, and
then implant that capsule right next to the heart of a
volunteer . The volunteer would carry with him a big, heavy
butcher knife as he accompanied the President. If ever the
President wanted to ﬁre nuclear weapons, the only way he
could do so would be for him ﬁrst, with his own hands, to
kill one human being. The President says, ‘George, I’m
sorry but tens of millions must die.’ He has to look at
someone and realize what death is—what an innocent
death is. Blood on the White House carpet. It’s reality
brought home.
“When I suggested this to friends in the P entagon they
said, ‘My God, that’s terrible. Having to kill someone would
distort the President’s judgment. He might never push the
button.’”
Throughout our discussion of the 4th Law of Behavior
Change we have covered the importance of making good
habits immediately satisfying. Fisher’s proposal is an
inversion of the 4th Law: Make it immediately unsatisfying.
Just as we are more likely to repeat an experience when
the ending is satisfying, we are also more likely to avoid an
experience when the ending is painful. P ain is an eﬀective
teacher . If a failure is painful, it gets ﬁxed. If a failure is
relatively painless, it gets ignored. The more immediate
and more costly a mistake is, the faster you will learn from
it. The threat of a bad review forces a plumber to be good
at his job. The possibility of a customer never returning
makes restaurants create good food. The cost of cutting the
wrong blood vessel makes a surgeon master human
anatomy and cut carefully . When the consequences are
severe, people learn quickly .
The more immediate the pain, the less likely the
behavior . If you want to prevent bad habits and eliminate
unhealthy behaviors, then adding an instant cost to the
action is a great way to reduce their odds.
We repeat bad habits because they serve us in some way ,
and that makes them hard to abandon. The best way I know
to overcome this predicament is to increase the speed of
the punishment associated with the behavior . There can’t
be a gap between the action and the consequences.
As soon as actions incur an immediate consequence,
behavior begins to change. Customers pay their bills on
time when they are charged a late fee. Students show up to
class when their grade is linked to attendance. W e’ll jump
through a lot of hoops to avoid a little bit of immediate
pain.
There is, of course, a limit to this. If you’re going to rely
on punishment to change behavior , then the strength of the
punishment must match the relative strength of the
behavior it is trying to correct. T o be productive, the cost of
procrastination must be greater than the cost of action. T o
be healthy , the cost of laziness must be greater than the
cost of exercise. Getting ﬁned for smoking in a restaurant
or failing to recycle adds consequence to an action.
Behavior only shifts if the punishment is painful enough
and reliably enforced.
In general, the more local, tangible, concrete, and
immediate the consequence, the more likely it is to
inﬂuence individual behavior . The more global, intangible,
vague, and delayed the consequence, the less likely it is to
inﬂuence individual behavior .
Thankfully , there is a straightforward way to add an
immediate cost to any bad habit: create a habit contract .
THE HABIT CONTRACT
The ﬁrst seat belt law was passed in New Y ork on
December 1, 1984. A t the time, just 14 percent of people in
the United States regularly wore a seat belt—but that was
all about to change.
Within ﬁve years, over half of the nation had seat belt
laws. T oday, wearing a seat belt is enforceable by law in
forty-nine of the ﬁfty states. And it’s not just the legislation,
the number of people wearing seat belts has changed
dramatically as well. In 2016, over 88 percent of Americans
buckled up each time they got in a car . In just over thirty
years, there was a complete reversal in the habits of
millions of people.
Laws and regulations are an example of how government
can change our habits by creating a social contract. As a
society , we collectively agree to abide by certain rules and
then enforce them as a group. Whenever a new piece of
legislation impacts behavior—seat belt laws, banning
smoking inside restaurants, mandatory recycling—it is an
example of a social contract shaping our habits. The group
agrees to act in a certain way , and if you don’t follow along,
you’ll be punished.
Just as governments use laws to hold citizens
accountable, you can create a habit contract to hold
yourself accountable. A habit contract is a verbal or written
agreement in which you state your commitment to a
particular habit and the punishment that will occur if you
don’t follow through. Then you ﬁnd one or two people to
act as your accountability partners and sign oﬀ on the
contract with you.
Bryan Harris, an entrepreneur from Nashville,
Tennessee, was the ﬁrst person I saw put this strategy into
action. Shortly after the birth of his son, Harris realized he
wanted to shed a few pounds. He wrote up a habit contract
between himself , his wife, and his personal trainer . The ﬁrst
version read, “Bryan’s #1 objective for Q1 of 2017 is to
start eating correctly again so he feels better , looks better ,
and is able to hit his long-term goal of 200 pounds at 10%
body fat.”
Below that statement, Harris laid out a road map for
achieving his ideal outcome:
Phase #1: Get back to a strict “slow-carb” diet in Q1.
Phase #2: Start a strict macronutrient tracking
program in Q2.
Phase #3: Reﬁne and maintain the details of his diet
and workout program in Q3.
Finally , he wrote out each of the daily habits that would
get him to his goal. F or example, “ Write down all food that
he consumes each day and weigh himself each day .”
And then he listed the punishment if he failed: “If Bryan
doesn’t do these two items then the following consequence
will be enforced: He will have to dress up each workday
and each Sunday morning for the rest of the quarter . Dress
up is deﬁned as not wearing jeans, t-shirts, hoodies, or
shorts. He will also give Joey (his trainer) $200 to use as he
sees ﬁt if he misses one day of logging food.”
At the bottom of the page, Harris, his wife, and his
trainer all signed the contract.
My initial reaction was that a contract like this seemed
overly formal and unnecessary , especially the signatures.
But Harris convinced me that signing the contract was an
indication of seriousness. “ Anytime I skip this part,” he
said, “I start slacking almost immediately .”
Three months later , after hitting his targets for Q1,
Harris upgraded his goals. The consequences escalated,
too. If he missed his carbohydrate and protein targets, he
had to pay his trainer $100. And if he failed to weigh
himself , he had to give his wife $500 to use as she saw ﬁt.
Perhaps most painfully , if he forgot to run sprints, he had to
dress up for work every day and wear an Alabama hat the
rest of the quarter—the bitter rival of his beloved Auburn
team.
The strategy worked. W ith his wife and trainer acting as
accountability partners and with the habit contract
clarifying exactly what to do each day , Harris lost the
weight. *
To make bad habits unsatisfying, your best option is to
make them painful in the moment. Creating a habit
contract is a straightforward way to do exactly that.
Even if you don’t want to create a full-blown habit
contract, simply having an accountability partner is useful.
The comedian Margaret Cho writes a joke or song every
day. She does the “song a day” challenge with a friend,
which helps them both stay accountable. Knowing that
someone is watching can be a powerful motivator . You are
less likely to procrastinate or give up because there is an
immediate cost. If you don’t follow through, perhaps they’ll
see you as untrustworthy or lazy . Suddenly , you are not only
failing to uphold your promises to yourself , but also failing
to uphold your promises to others.
You can even automate this process. Thomas Frank, an
entrepreneur in Boulder , Colorado, wakes up at 5:55 each
morning. And if he doesn’t, he has a tweet automatically
scheduled that says, “It’s 6:10 and I’m not up because I’m
lazy! Reply to this for $5 via P ayPal (limit 5), assuming my
alarm didn’t malfunction.”
We are always trying to present our best selves to the
world. W e comb our hair and brush our teeth and dress
ourselves carefully because we know these habits are likely
to get a positive reaction. W e want to get good grades and
graduate from top schools to impress potential employers
and mates and our friends and family . We care about the
opinions of those around us because it helps if others like
us. This is precisely why getting an accountability partner
or signing a habit contract can work so well.
Chapter Summary
The inversion of the 4th Law of Behavior Change is
make it unsatisfying .
We are less likely to repeat a bad habit if it is painful or
unsatisfying.
An accountability partner can create an immediate cost
to inaction. W e care deeply about what others think of
us, and we do not want others to have a lesser opinion
of us.
A habit contract can be used to add a social cost to any
behavior . It makes the costs of violating your promises
public and painful.
Knowing that someone else is watching you can be a
powerful motivator .
HOW TO CREA TE A GOOD HABIT
The 1st Law: Mak e It Obvious
1.1: Fill out the Habits Scor ecard. Write down your cur rent habits to become
awar e of them.
1.2: Use implementation intentions: “I will [BEHA VIOR] at [TIME] in
[LOCATION].”
1.3: Use habit stacking: “ After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].”
1.4: Design your envir onment. Mak e the cues of good habits obvious and
visible.
The 2nd Law:Mak e It Attractive
2.1: Use temptation bundling. P air an action you want  to do with an action you
need  to do .
2.2: Join a cultur e wher e your desir ed behavior is the nor mal behavior .
2.3: Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately befor e a
diﬃcult habit.
The 3rd Law: Mak e It Easy
3.1: Reduce friction. Decr ease the number of steps between you and your
good habits.
3.2: Prime the envir onment. P repare your envir onment to mak e futur e actions
easier .
3.3: Master the decisive moment. Optimize the small choices that deliver
outsized impact.
3.4: Use the T wo-Minute R ule. Downscale your habits until they can be done in
two minutes or less.
3.5: Automate your habits. Invest in technology and onetime pur chases that
lock in futur e behavior .
The 4th Law: Mak e It Satisfying
4.1: Use r einfor cement. Give yourself an immediate r ewar d when you
complete your habit.
4.2: Make “doing nothing” enjoyable. When avoiding a bad habit, design a way
to see the beneﬁts.
4.3: Use a habit track er. Keep track of your habit str eak and “don’t br eak the
chain.”
4.4: Never miss twice. When you for get to do a habit, mak e sur e you get back
on track immediately .
HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT
Inversion of the 1st Law: Mak e It Invisible
1.5: Reduce e xposur e. Remove the cues of your bad habits fr om your
envir onment.
Inversion of the 2nd Law: Mak e It Unattractive
2.4: Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the beneﬁts of avoiding your bad habits.
Inversion of the 3rd Law: Mak e It Diﬃcult
3.6: Increase friction. Incr ease the number of steps between you and your bad
habits.
3.7: Use a commitment device. R estrict your futur e choices to the ones that
beneﬁt you.
Inversion of the 4th Law: Mak e It Unsatisfying
4.5: Get an accountability partner . Ask someone to watch your behavior .
4.6: Create a habit contract. Mak e the costs of your bad habits public and
painful.
You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at:
atomichabits.com/cheatsheet