M
18
The T ruth About T alent (When Genes Matter and
When They Don’t)
ANY PEOPLE ARE familiar with Michael Phelps, who is
widely considered to be one of the greatest athletes in
history . Phelps has won more Olympic medals not only than
any swimmer but also more than any Olympian in any
sport.
Fewer people know the name Hicham El Guerrouj, but
he was a fantastic athlete in his own right. El Guerrouj is a
Moroccan runner who holds two Olympic gold medals and
is one of the greatest middle-distance runners of all time.
For many years, he held the world record in the mile,
1,500-meter , and 2,000-meter races. A t the Olympic Games
in Athens, Greece, in 2004, he won gold in the 1,500-meter
and 5,000-meter races.
These two athletes are wildly diﬀerent in many ways.
(For starters, one competed on land and the other in
water .) But most notably , they diﬀer signiﬁcantly in height.
El Guerrouj is ﬁve feet, nine inches tall. Phelps is six feet,
four inches tall. Despite this seven-inch diﬀerence in
height, the two men are identical in one respect: Michael
Phelps and Hicham El Guerrouj wear the same length
inseam on their pants.
How is this possible? Phelps has relatively short legs for
his height and a very long torso, the perfect build for
swimming. El Guerrouj has incredibly long legs and a short
upper body , an ideal frame for distance running.
Now, imagine if these world-class athletes were to switch
sports. Given his remarkable athleticism, could Michael
Phelps become an Olympic-caliber distance runner with
enough training? It’s unlikely . At peak ﬁtness, Phelps
weighed 194 pounds, which is 40 percent heavier than El
Guerrouj, who competed at an ultralight 138 pounds. T aller
runners are heavier runners, and every extra pound is a
curse when it comes to distance running. Against elite
competition, Phelps would be doomed from the start.
Similarly , El Guerrouj might be one of the best runners in
history , but it’s doubtful he would ever qualify for the
Olympics as a swimmer . Since 1976, the average height of
Olympic gold medalists in the men’s 1,500-meter run is ﬁve
feet, ten inches. In comparison, the average height of
Olympic gold medalists in the men’s 100-meter freestyle
swim is six feet, four inches. Swimmers tend to be tall and
have long backs and arms, which are ideal for pulling
through the water . El Guerrouj would be at a severe
disadvantage before he ever touched the pool.
The secret to maximizing your odds of success is to
choose the right ﬁeld of competition. This is just as true
with habit change as it is with sports and business. Habits
are easier to perform, and more satisfying to stick with,
when they align with your natural inclinations and abilities.
Like Michael Phelps in the pool or Hicham El Guerrouj on
the track, you want to play a game where the odds are in
your favor .
Embracing this strategy requires the acceptance of the
simple truth that people are born with diﬀerent abilities.
Some people don’t like to discuss this fact. On the surface,
your genes seem to be ﬁxed, and it’s no fun to talk about
things you cannot control. Plus, phrases like biological
determinism  makes it sound like certain individuals are
destined for success and others doomed to failure. But this
is a shortsighted view of the inﬂuence of genes on behavior .
The strength of genetics is also their weakness. Genes
cannot be easily changed, which means they provide a
powerful advantage in favorable circumstances and a
serious disadvantage in unfavorable circumstances. If you
want to dunk a basketball, being seven feet tall is very
useful. If you want to perform a gymnastics routine, being
seven feet tall is a great hindrance. Our environment
determines the suitability of our genes and the utility of our
natural talents. When our environment changes, so do the
qualities that determine success.
This is true not just for physical characteristics but for
mental ones as well. I’m smart if you ask me about habits
and human behavior; not so much when it comes to
knitting, rocket propulsion, or guitar chords. Competence
is highly dependent on context.
The people at the top of any competitive ﬁeld are not
only well trained, they are also well suited to the task. And
this is why , if you want to be truly great, selecting the right
place to focus is crucial.
In short: genes do not determine your destiny . They
determine your areas of opportunity . As physician Gabor
Mate notes, “ Genes can predispose, but they don’t
predetermine.” The areas where you are genetically
predisposed to success are the areas where habits are
more likely to be satisfying. The key is to direct your eﬀort
toward areas that both excite you and match your natural
skills, to align your ambition with your ability .
The obvious question is, “How do I ﬁgure out where the
odds are in my favor? How do I identify the opportunities
and habits that are right for me?” The ﬁrst place we will
look for an answer is by understanding your personality .
HOW Y OUR PERSONALITY INFL UENCES Y OUR HABITS
Your genes are operating beneath the surface of every
habit. Indeed, beneath the surface of every behavior . Genes
have been shown to inﬂuence everything from the number
of hours you spend watching television to your likelihood to
marry or divorce to your tendency to get addicted to drugs,
alcohol, or nicotine. There’s a strong genetic component to
how obedient or rebellious you are when facing authority ,
how vulnerable or resistant you are to stressful events, how
proactive or reactive you tend to be, and even how
captivated or bored you feel during sensory experiences
like attending a concert. As Robert Plomin, a behavioral
geneticist at King’s College in London, told me, “It is now
at the point where we have stopped testing to see if traits
have a genetic component because we literally can’t ﬁnd a
single one that isn’t inﬂuenced by our genes.”
Bundled together , your unique cluster of genetic traits
predispose you to a particular personality . Your personality
is the set of characteristics that is consistent from situation
to situation. The most proven scientiﬁc analysis of
personality traits is known as the “Big Five,” which breaks
them down into ﬁve spectrums of behavior .
1. Openness to experience: from curious and inventive
on one end to cautious and consistent on the other .
2. Conscientiousness: organized and eﬀicient to
easygoing and spontaneous.
3. Extroversion: outgoing and energetic to solitary and
reserved (you likely know them as extroverts vs.
introverts).
4. Agreeableness: friendly and compassionate to
challenging and detached.
5. Neuroticism: anxious and sensitive to conﬁdent, calm,
and stable.
All ﬁve characteristics have biological underpinnings.
Extroversion, for instance, can be tracked from birth. If
scientists play a loud noise in the nursing ward, some
babies turn toward it while others turn away . When the
researchers tracked these children through life, they found
that the babies who turned toward the noise were more
likely to grow up to be extroverts. Those who turned away
were more likely to become introverts.
People who are high in agreeableness are kind,
considerate, and warm. They also tend to have higher
natural oxytocin levels, a hormone that plays an important
role in social bonding, increases feelings of trust, and can
act as a natural antidepressant. Y ou can easily imagine how
someone with more oxytocin might be inclined to build
habits like writing thank -you notes or organizing social
events.
As a third example, consider neuroticism, which is a
personality trait all people possess to various degrees.
People who are high in neuroticism tend to be anxious and
worry more than others. This trait has been linked to
hypersensitivity of the amygdala, the portion of the brain
responsible for noticing threats. In other words, people
who are more sensitive to negative cues in their
environment are more likely to score high in neuroticism.
Our habits are not solely determined by our
personalities, but there is no doubt that our genes nudge us
in a certain direction. Our deeply rooted preferences make
certain behaviors easier for some people than for others.
You don’t have to apologize for these diﬀerences or feel
guilty about them, but you do have to work with them. A
person who scores lower on conscientiousness, for
example, will be less likely to be orderly by nature and may
need to rely more heavily on environment design to stick
with good habits. (As a reminder for the less conscientious
readers among us, environment design is a strategy we
discussed in Chapters 6 and 12.)
The takeaway is that you should build habits that work
for your personality .* People can get ripped working out
like a bodybuilder , but if you prefer rock climbing or
cycling or rowing, then shape your exercise habit around
your interests. If your friend follows a low-carb diet but you
ﬁnd that low-fat works for you, then more power to you. If
you want to read more, don’t be embarrassed if you prefer
steamy romance novels over nonﬁction. Read whatever
fascinates you. * You don’t have to build the habits everyone
tells you to build. Choose the habit that best suits you, not
the one that is most popular .
There is a version of every habit that can bring you joy
and satisfaction. Find it. Habits need to be enjoyable if they
are going to stick. This is the core idea behind the 4th Law .
Tailoring your habits to your personality is a good start,
but this is not the end of the story . Let’s turn our attention
to ﬁnding and designing situations where you’re at a
natural advantage.
HOW TO FIND A GAME WHERE THE ODDS ARE IN
YOUR F AVOR
Learning to play a game where the odds are in your favor is
critical for maintaining motivation and feeling successful.
In theory , you can enjoy almost anything. In practice, you
are more likely to enjoy the things that come easily to you.
People who are talented in a particular area tend to be
more competent at that task and are then praised for doing
a good job. They stay energized because they are making
progress where others have failed, and because they get
rewarded with better pay and bigger opportunities, which
not only makes them happier but also propels them to
produce even higher-quality work. It’s a virtuous cycle.
Pick the right habit and progress is easy . Pick the wrong
habit and life is a struggle.
How do you pick the right habit? The ﬁrst step is
something we covered in the 3rd Law: make it easy . In
many cases, when people pick the wrong habit, it simply
means they picked a habit that was too diﬀicult. When a
habit is easy , you are more likely to be successful. When
you are successful, you are more likely to feel satisﬁed.
However , there is another level to consider . In the long-run,
if you continue to advance and improve, any area can
become challenging. A t some point, you need to make sure
you’re playing the right game for your skillset. How do you
ﬁgure that out?
The most common approach is trial and error . Of course,
there’s a problem with this strategy: life is short. Y ou don’t
have time to try every career , date every eligible bachelor ,
or play every musical instrument. Thankfully , there is an
eﬀective way to manage this conundrum, and it is known as
the explore/exploit trade-oﬀ .
In the beginning of a new activity , there should be a
period of exploration. In relationships, it’s called dating. In
college, it’s called the liberal arts. In business, it’s called
split testing. The goal is to try out many possibilities,
research a broad range of ideas, and cast a wide net.
After this initial period of exploration, shift your focus to
the best solution you’ve found—but keep experimenting
occasionally . The proper balance depends on whether
you’re winning or losing. If you are currently winning, you
exploit, exploit, exploit. If you are currently losing, you
continue to explore, explore, explore.
In the long-run it is probably most eﬀective to work on
the strategy that seems to deliver the best results about 80
to 90 percent of the time and keep exploring with the
remaining 10 to 20 percent. Google famously asks
employees to spend 80 percent of the workweek on their
oﬀicial job and 20 percent on projects of their choice,
which has led to the creation of blockbuster products like
AdWords and Gmail.
The optimal approach also depends on how much time
you have. If you have a lot of time—like someone at the
beginning of their career—it makes more sense to explore
because once you ﬁnd the right thing, you still have a good
amount of time to exploit it. If you’re pressed for time—say ,
as you come up on the deadline for a project—you should
implement the best solution you’ve found so far and get
some results.
As you explore diﬀerent options, there are a series of
questions you can ask yourself to continually narrow in on
the habits and areas that will be most satisfying to you:
What feels like fun to me, but work to others? The
mark of whether you are made for a task is not
whether you love it but whether you can handle the
pain of the task easier than most people. When are you
enjoying yourself while other people are complaining?
The work that hurts you less than it hurts others is the
work you were made to do .
What makes me lose track of time? Flow is the
mental state you enter when you are so focused on the
task at hand that the rest of the world fades away . This
blend of happiness and peak performance is what
athletes and performers experience when they are “in
the zone.” It is nearly impossible to experience a ﬂow
state and not ﬁnd the task satisfying at least to some
degree.
Where do I get greater returns than the average
person?  We are continually comparing ourselves to
those around us, and a behavior is more likely to be
satisfying when the comparison is in our favor . When I
started writing at jamesclear .com, my email list grew
very quickly . I wasn’t quite sure what I was doing well,
but I knew that results seemed to be coming faster for
me than for some of my colleagues, which motivated
me to keep writing.
What comes naturally to me? For just a moment,
ignore what you have been taught. Ignore what society
has told you. Ignore what others expect of you. Look
inside yourself and ask, “ What feels natural to me?
When have I felt alive? When have I felt like the real
me?” No internal judgments or people-pleasing. No
second-guessing or self -criticism. Just feelings of
engagement and enjoyment. Whenever you feel
authentic and genuine, you are headed in the right
direction.
To be honest, some of this process is just luck. Michael
Phelps and Hicham El Guerrouj were lucky to be born with
a rare set of abilities that are highly valued by society and
to be placed in the ideal environment for those abilities. W e
all have limited time on this planet, and the truly great
among us are the ones who not only work hard but also
have the good fortune to be exposed to opportunities that
favor us.
But what if you don’t want to leave it up to luck?
If you can’t ﬁnd a game where the odds are stacked in
your favor , create one. Scott Adams, the cartoonist behind
Dilbert , says, “ Everyone has at least a few areas in which
they could be in the top 25% with some eﬀort. In my case, I
can draw better than most people, but I’m hardly an artist.
And I’m not any funnier than the average standup
comedian who never makes it big, but I’m funnier than
most people. The magic is that few people can draw well
and write jokes. It’s the combination of the two that makes
what I do so rare. And when you add in my business
background, suddenly I had a topic that few cartoonists
could hope to understand without living it.”
When you can’t win by being better , you can win by
being diﬀerent. By combining your skills, you reduce the
level of competition, which makes it easier to stand out.
You can shortcut the need for a genetic advantage (or for
years of practice) by rewriting the rules. A good player
works hard to win the game everyone else is playing. A
great player creates a new game that favors their strengths
and avoids their weaknesses.
In college, I designed my own major , biomechanics,
which was a combination of physics, chemistry , biology , and
anatomy . I wasn’t smart enough to stand out among the top
physics or biology majors, so I created my own game. And
because it suited me—I was only taking the courses I was
interested in—studying felt like less of a chore. It was also
easier to avoid the trap of comparing myself to everyone
else. A fter all, nobody else was taking the same
combination of classes, so who could say if they were better
or worse?
Specialization is a powerful way to overcome the
“accident” of bad genetics. The more you master a speciﬁc
skill, the harder it becomes for others to compete with you.
Many bodybuilders are stronger than the average arm
wrestler , but even a massive bodybuilder may lose at arm
wrestling because the arm wrestling champ has very
speciﬁc strength. Even if you’re not the most naturally
gifted, you can often win by being the best in a very narrow
category .
Boiling water will soften a potato but harden an egg. Y ou
can’t control whether you’re a potato or an egg, but you
can decide to play a game where it’s better to be hard or
soft. If you can ﬁnd a more favorable environment, you can
transform the situation from one where the odds are
against you to one where they are in your favor .
HOW TO GET THE MOST OUT OF Y OUR GENES
Our genes do not eliminate the need for hard work. They
clarify it. They tell us what  to work hard on. Once we
realize our strengths, we know where to spend our time
and energy . We know which types of opportunities to look
for and which types of challenges to avoid. The better we
understand our nature, the better our strategy can be.
Biological diﬀerences matter . Even so, it’s more
productive to focus on whether you are fulﬁlling your own
potential than comparing yourself to someone else. The fact
that you have a natural limit to any speciﬁc ability has
nothing to do with whether you are reaching the ceiling of
your capabilities. P eople get so caught up in the fact that
they have  limits that they rarely exert the eﬀort required to
get close to them.
Furthermore, genes can’t make you successful if you’re
not doing the work. Y es, it’s possible that the ripped trainer
at the gym has better genes, but if you haven’t put in the
same reps, it’s impossible to say if you have been dealt a
better or worse genetic hand. Until you work as hard as
those you admire, don’t explain away their success as luck.
In summary , one of the best ways to ensure your habits
remain satisfying over the long-run is to pick behaviors that
align with your personality and skills. W ork hard on the
things that come easy .
Chapter Summary
The secret to maximizing your odds of success is to
choose the right ﬁeld of competition.
Pick the right habit and progress is easy . Pick the
wrong habit and life is a struggle.
Genes cannot be easily changed, which means they
provide a powerful advantage in favorable
circumstances and a serious disadvantage in
unfavorable circumstances.
Habits are easier when they align with your natural
abilities. Choose the habits that best suit you.
Play a game that favors your strengths. If you can’t ﬁnd
a game that favors you, create one.
Genes do not eliminate the need for hard work. They
clarify it. They tell us what  to work hard on.