I
19
The Goldilocks R ule: How to Stay Motivated in Life
and W ork
N 1955 , Disneyland had just opened in Anaheim,
California, when a ten-year-old boy walked in and asked
for a job. Labor laws were loose back then and the boy
managed to land a position selling guidebooks for $0.50
apiece.
Within a year , he had transitioned to Disney’s magic
shop, where he learned tricks from the older employees. He
experimented with jokes and tried out simple routines on
visitors. Soon he discovered that what he loved was not
performing magic but performing in general. He set his
sights on becoming a comedian.
Beginning in his teenage years, he started performing in
little clubs around Los Angeles. The crowds were small and
his act was short. He was rarely on stage for more than ﬁve
minutes. Most of the people in the crowd were too busy
drinking or talking with friends to pay attention. One night,
he literally delivered his stand-up routine to an empty club.
It wasn’t glamorous work, but there was no doubt he was
getting better . His ﬁrst routines would only last one or two
minutes. By high school, his material had expanded to
include a ﬁve-minute act and, a few years later , a ten-
minute show . At nineteen, he was performing weekly for
twenty minutes at a time. He had to read three poems
during the show just to make the routine long enough, but
his skills continued to progress.
He spent another decade experimenting, adjusting, and
practicing. He took a job as a television writer and,
gradually , he was able to land his own appearances on talk
shows. By the mid-1970s, he had worked his way into being
a regular guest on The T onight Show  and Saturday Night
Live.
Finally , after nearly ﬁfteen years of work, the young man
rose to fame. He toured sixty cities in sixty-three days.
Then seventy-two cities in eighty days. Then eighty-ﬁve
cities in ninety days. He had 18,695 people attend one
show in Ohio . Another 45,000 tickets were sold for his
three-day show in New Y ork. He catapulted to the top of his
genre and became one of the most successful comedians of
his time.
His name is Steve Martin.
Martin’s story oﬀers a fascinating perspective on what it
takes to stick with habits for the long run. Comedy is not
for the timid. It is hard to imagine a situation that would
strike fear into the hearts of more people than performing
alone on stage and failing to get a single laugh. And yet
Steve Martin faced this fear every week for eighteen years.
In his words, “10 years spent learning, 4 years spent
reﬁning, and 4 years as a wild success.”
Why is it that some people, like Martin, stick with their
habits—whether practicing jokes or drawing cartoons or
playing guitar—while most of us struggle to stay
motivated? How do we design habits that pull us in rather
than ones that fade away? Scientists have been studying
this question for many years. While there is still much to
learn, one of the most consistent ﬁndings is that the way to
maintain motivation and achieve peak levels of desire is to
work on tasks of “ just manageable diﬀiculty .”
The human brain loves a challenge, but only if it is within
an optimal zone of diﬀiculty . If you love tennis and try to
play a serious match against a four-year-old, you will
quickly become bored. It’s too easy . You’ll win every point.
In contrast, if you play a professional tennis player like
Roger F ederer or Serena W illiams, you will quickly lose
motivation because the match is too diﬀicult.
Now consider playing tennis against someone who is
your equal. As the game progresses, you win a few points
and you lose a few . You have a good chance of winning, but
only if you really try . Your focus narrows, distractions fade
away , and you ﬁnd yourself fully invested in the task at
hand. This is a challenge of just manageable diﬀiculty and
it is a prime example of the Goldilocks Rule .
The Goldilocks Rule states that humans experience peak
motivation when working on tasks that are right on the
edge of their current abilities. Not too hard. Not too easy .
Just right.
THE GOLDIL OCKS RULE
FIGURE 15: Maximum motivation occurs when facing a challenge
of just manageable diﬃculty . In psychology r esear ch this is
known as the Y erkes–Dodson law, which describes the optimal
level of ar ousal as the midpoint between bor edom and anxiety .
Martin’s comedy career is an excellent example of the
Goldilocks Rule in practice. Each year , he expanded his
comedy routine—but only by a minute or two . He was
always adding new material, but he also kept a few jokes
that were guaranteed to get laughs. There were just
enough victories to keep him motivated and just enough
mistakes to keep him working hard.
When you’re starting a new habit, it’s important to keep
the behavior as easy as possible so you can stick with it
even when conditions aren’t perfect. This is an idea we
covered in detail while discussing the 3rd Law of Behavior
Change.
Once a habit has been established, however , it’s
important to continue to advance in small ways. These little
improvements and new challenges keep you engaged. And
if you hit the Goldilocks Zone just right, you can achieve a
ﬂow state .*
A ﬂow state is the experience of being “in the zone” and
fully immersed in an activity . Scientists have tried to
quantify this feeling. They found that to achieve a state of
ﬂow, a task must be roughly 4 percent beyond your current
ability . In real life it’s typically not feasible to quantify the
diﬀiculty of an action in this way , but the core idea of the
Goldilocks Rule remains: working on challenges of just
manageable diﬀiculty—something on the perimeter of your
ability—seems crucial for maintaining motivation.
Improvement requires a delicate balance. Y ou need to
regularly search for challenges that push you to your edge
while continuing to make enough progress to stay
motivated. Behaviors need to remain novel in order for
them to stay attractive and satisfying. W ithout variety , we
get bored. And boredom is perhaps the greatest villain on
the quest for self -improvement.
HOW TO ST AY FOCUSED WHEN Y OU GET BORED
WORKING ON Y OUR GO ALS
After my baseball career ended, I was looking for a new
sport. I joined a weightlifting team and one day an elite
coach visited our gym. He had worked with thousands of
athletes during his long career , including a few Olympians.
I introduced myself and we began talking about the process
of improvement.
“What’s the diﬀerence between the best athletes and
everyone else?” I asked. “ What do the really successful
people do that most don’t?”
He mentioned the factors you might expect: genetics,
luck, talent. But then he said something I wasn’t expecting:
“At some point it comes down to who can handle the
boredom of training every day , doing the same lifts over
and over and over .”
His answer surprised me because it’s a diﬀerent way of
thinking about work ethic. P eople talk about getting
“amped up” to work on their goals. Whether it’s business or
sports or art, you hear people say things like, “It all comes
down to passion.” Or , “You have to really want it.” As a
result, many of us get depressed when we lose focus or
motivation because we think that successful people have
some bottomless reserve of passion. But this coach was
saying that really successful people feel the same lack of
motivation as everyone else. The diﬀerence is that they still
ﬁnd a way to show up despite the feelings of boredom.
Mastery requires practice. But the more you practice
something, the more boring and routine it becomes. Once
the beginner gains have been made and we learn what to
expect, our interest starts to fade. Sometimes it happens
even faster than that. All you have to do is hit the gym a
few days in a row or publish a couple of blog posts on time
and letting one day slip doesn’t feel like much. Things are
going well. It’s easy to rationalize taking a day oﬀ because
you’re in a good place.
The greatest threat to success is not failure but
boredom. W e get bored with habits because they stop
delighting us. The outcome becomes expected. And as our
habits become ordinary , we start derailing our progress to
seek novelty . Perhaps this is why we get caught up in a
never-ending cycle, jumping from one workout to the next,
one diet to the next, one business idea to the next. As soon
as we experience the slightest dip in motivation, we begin
seeking a new strategy—even if the old one was still
working. As Machiavelli noted, “ Men desire novelty to such
an extent that those who are doing well wish for a change
as much as those who are doing badly .”
Perhaps this is why many of the most habit-forming
products are those that provide continuous forms of
novelty . Video games provide visual novelty . Porn provides
sexual novelty . Junk foods provide culinary novelty . Each of
these experiences oﬀer continual elements of surprise.
In psychology , this is known as a variable reward .* Slot
machines are the most common real-world example. A
gambler hits the jackpot every now and then but not at any
predictable interval. The pace of rewards varies. This
variance leads to the greatest spike of dopamine, enhances
memory recall, and accelerates habit formation.
Variable rewards won’t create  a craving—that is, you
can’t take a reward people are uninterested in, give it to
them at a variable interval, and hope it will change their
mind—but they are a powerful way to amplify the cravings
we already experience because they reduce boredom.
The sweet spot of desire occurs at a 50/50 split between
success and failure. Half of the time you get what you want.
Half of the time you don’t. Y ou need just enough “winning”
to experience satisfaction and just enough “wanting” to
experience desire. This is one of the beneﬁts of following
the Goldilocks Rule. If you’re already interested in a habit,
working on challenges of just manageable diﬀiculty is a
good way to keep things interesting.
Of course, not all habits have a variable reward
component, and you wouldn’t want them to . If Google only
delivered a useful search result some of the time, I would
switch to a competitor pretty quickly . If Uber only picked
up half of my trips, I doubt I’d be using that service much
longer . And if I ﬂossed my teeth each night and only
sometimes ended up with a clean mouth, I think I’d skip it.
Variable rewards or not, no habit will stay interesting
forever . At some point, everyone faces the same challenge
on the journey of self -improvement: you have to fall in love
with boredom.
We all have goals that we would like to achieve and
dreams that we would like to fulﬁll, but it doesn’t matter
what you are trying to become better at, if you only do the
work when it’s convenient or exciting, then you’ll never be
consistent enough to achieve remarkable results.
I can guarantee that if you manage to start a habit and
keep sticking to it, there will be days when you feel like
quitting. When you start a business, there will be days
when you don’t feel like showing up. When you’re at the
gym, there will be sets that you don’t feel like ﬁnishing.
When it’s time to write, there will be days that you don’t
feel like typing. But stepping up when it’s annoying or
painful or draining to do so, that’s what makes the
diﬀerence between a professional and an amateur .
Professionals stick to the schedule; amateurs let life get
in the way . Professionals know what is important to them
and work toward it with purpose; amateurs get pulled oﬀ
course by the urgencies of life.
David Cain, an author and meditation teacher ,
encourages his students to avoid being “fair-weather
meditators.” Similarly , you don’t want to be a fair-weather
athlete or a fair-weather writer or a fair-weather anything.
When a habit is truly important to you, you have to be
willing to stick to it in any mood. Professionals take action
even when the mood isn’t right. They might not enjoy it,
but they ﬁnd a way to put the reps in.
There have been a lot of sets that I haven’t felt like
ﬁnishing, but I’ve never regretted doing the workout. There
have been a lot of articles I haven’t felt like writing, but
I’ve never regretted publishing on schedule. There have
been a lot of days I’ve felt like relaxing, but I’ve never
regretted showing up and working on something that was
important to me.
The only way to become excellent is to be endlessly
fascinated by doing the same thing over and over . You have
to fall in love with boredom.
Chapter Summary
The Goldilocks Rule states that humans experience
peak motivation when working on tasks that are right
on the edge of their current abilities.
The greatest threat to success is not failure but
boredom.
As habits become routine, they become less interesting
and less satisfying. W e get bored.
Anyone can work hard when they feel motivated. It’s
the ability to keep going when work isn’t exciting that
makes the diﬀerence.
Professionals stick to the schedule; amateurs let life
get in the way.