H
20
The Downside of Cr eating Good Habits
ABITS CREA TE THE FOUNDA TION FOR MASTER Y. In chess, it is
only after the basic movements of the pieces have
become automatic that a player can focus on the next level
of the game. Each chunk of information that is memorized
opens up the mental space for more eﬀortful thinking. This
is true for any endeavor . When you know the simple
movements so well that you can perform them without
thinking, you are free to pay attention to more advanced
details. In this way , habits are the backbone of any pursuit
of excellence.
However , the beneﬁts of habits come at a cost. A t ﬁrst,
each repetition develops ﬂuency , speed, and skill. But then,
as a habit becomes automatic, you become less sensitive to
feedback. Y ou fall into mindless repetition. It becomes
easier to let mistakes slide. When you can do it “good
enough” on autopilot, you stop thinking about how to do it
better .
The upside of habits is that we can do things without
thinking. The downside of habits is that you get used to
doing things a certain way and stop paying attention to
little errors. Y ou assume you’re getting better because
you’re gaining experience. In reality , you are merely
reinforcing your current habits—not improving them. In
fact, some research has shown that once a skill has been
mastered there is usually a slight decline  in performance
over time.
Usually , this minor dip in performance is no cause for
worry . You don’t need a system to continuously improve
how well you brush your teeth or tie your shoes or make
your morning cup of tea. W ith habits like these, good
enough is usually good enough. The less energy you spend
on trivial choices, the more you can spend it on what really
matters.
However , when you want to maximize your potential and
achieve elite levels of performance, you need a more
nuanced approach. Y ou can’t repeat the same things blindly
and expect to become exceptional. Habits are necessary ,
but not suﬀicient for mastery . What you need is a
combination of automatic habits and deliberate practice.
Habits + Deliberate Practice = Mastery
To become great, certain skills do need to become
automatic. Basketball players need to be able to dribble
without thinking before they can move on to mastering
layups with their nondominant hand. Surgeons need to
repeat the ﬁrst incision so many times that they could do it
with their eyes closed, so that they can focus on the
hundreds of variables that arise during surgery . But after
one habit has been mastered, you have to return to the
eﬀortful part of the work and begin building the next habit.
Mastery is the process of narrowing your focus to a tiny
element of success, repeating it until you have internalized
the skill, and then using this new habit as the foundation to
advance to the next frontier of your development. Old tasks
become easier the second time around, but it doesn’t get
easier overall because now you’re pouring your energy into
the next challenge. Each habit unlocks the next level of
performance. It’s an endless cycle.
MASTERING ONE HABIT
MASTERING A FIELD
FIGURE 16: The pr ocess of mastery r equir es that you
progressively layer impr ovements on top of one another, each
habit building upon the last until a new level of perfor mance has
been r eached and a higher range of skills has been inter nalized.
Although habits are powerful, what you need is a way to
remain conscious of your performance over time, so you
can continue to reﬁne and improve. It is precisely at the
moment when you begin to feel like you have mastered a
skill—right when things are starting to feel automatic and
you are becoming comfortable—that you must avoid
slipping into the trap of complacency .
The solution? Establish a system for reﬂection and
review .
HOW TO REVIEW Y OUR HABITS AND MAKE
ADJUSTMENTS
In 1986, the Los Angeles Lakers had one of the most
talented basketball teams ever assembled, but they are
rarely remembered that way . The team started the 1985–
1986 NBA season with an astounding 29–5 record. “ The
pundits were saying that we might be the best team in the
history of basketball,” head coach P at Riley said after the
season. Surprisingly , the Lakers stumbled in the 1986
playoﬀs and suﬀered a season-ending defeat in the W estern
Conference Finals. The “best team in the history of
basketball” didn’t even play for the NBA championship.
After that blow , Riley was tired of hearing about how
much talent his players had and about how much promise
his team held. He didn’t want to see ﬂashes of brilliance
followed by a gradual fade in performance. He wanted the
Lakers to play up to their potential, night after night. In the
summer of 1986, he created a plan to do exactly that, a
system that he called the Career Best Eﬀort program or
CBE.
“When players ﬁrst join the Lakers,” Riley explained, “we
track their basketball statistics all the way back to high
school. I call this T aking Their Number . We look for an
accurate gauge of what a player can do, then build him into
our plan for the team, based on the notion that he will
maintain and then improve upon his averages.”
After determining a player’s baseline level of
performance, Riley added a key step. He asked each player
to “improve their output by at least 1 percent over the
course of the season. If they succeeded, it would be a CBE,
or Career Best Eﬀort.” Similar to the British Cycling team
that we discussed in Chapter 1, the Lakers sought peak
performance by getting slightly better each day .
Riley was careful to point out that CBE was not merely
about points or statistics but about giving your “best eﬀort
spiritually and mentally and physically .” Players got credit
for “allowing an opponent to run into you when you know
that a foul will be called against him, diving for loose balls,
going after rebounds whether you are likely to get them or
not, helping a teammate when the player he’s guarding has
surged past him, and other ‘unsung hero’ deeds.”
As an example, let’s say that Magic Johnson—the Lakers
star player at the time—had 11 points, 8 rebounds, 12
assists, 2 steals, and 5 turnovers in a game. Magic also got
credit for an “unsung hero” deed by diving after a loose
ball (+1). Finally , he played a total of 33 minutes in this
imaginary game.
The positive numbers (11 + 8 + 12 + 2 + 1) add up to
34. Then, we subtract the 5 turnovers (34–5) to get 29.
Finally , we divide 29 by 33 minutes played.
29/33 = 0.879
Magic’s CBE number here would be 879. This number
was calculated for all of a player’s games, and it was the
average CBE that a player was asked to improve by 1
percent over the season. Riley compared each player’s
current CBE to not only their past performances but also
those of other players in the league. As Riley put it, “ We
rank team members alongside league opponents who play
the same position and have similar role deﬁnitions.”
Sportswriter Jackie MacMullan noted, “Riley trumpeted
the top performers in the league in bold lettering on the
blackboard each week and measured them against the
corresponding players on his own roster . Solid, reliable
players generally rated a score in the 600s, while elite
players scored at least 800. Magic Johnson, who submitted
138 triple-doubles in his career , often scored over 1,000.”
The Lakers also emphasized year-over-year progress by
making historical comparisons of CBE data. Riley said, “ We
stacked the month of November 1986, next to November
1985, and showed the players whether they were doing
better or worse than at the same point last season. Then we
showed them how their performance ﬁgures for December
1986, stacked up against November’s.”
The Lakers rolled out CBE in October 1986. Eight
months later , they were NBA champions. The following
year, Pat Riley led his team to another title as the Lakers
became the ﬁrst team in twenty years to win back -to-back
NBA championships. A fterward, he said, “ Sustaining an
eﬀort is the most important thing for any enterprise. The
way to be successful is to learn how to do things right, then
do them the same way every time.”
The CBE program is a prime example of the power of
reﬂection and review . The Lakers were already talented.
CBE helped them get the most out of what they had, and
made sure their habits improved rather than declined.
Reﬂection and review enables the long-term
improvement of all habits because it makes you aware of
your mistakes and helps you consider possible paths for
improvement. W ithout reﬂection, we can make excuses,
create rationalizations, and lie to ourselves. W e have no
process for determining whether we are performing better
or worse compared to yesterday .
Top performers in all ﬁelds engage in various types of
reﬂection and review , and the process doesn’t have to be
complex. K enyan runner Eliud Kipchoge is one of the
greatest marathoners of all time and an Olympic gold
medalist. He still takes notes after every practice in which
he reviews his training for the day and searches for areas
that can be improved. Similarly , gold medal swimmer Katie
Ledecky records her wellness on a scale of 1 to 10 and
includes notes on her nutrition and how well she slept. She
also records the times posted by other swimmers. A t the
end of each week, her coach goes over her notes and adds
his thoughts.
It’s not just athletes, either . When comedian Chris Rock
is preparing fresh material, he will ﬁrst appear at small
nightclubs dozens of times and test hundreds of jokes. He
brings a notepad on stage and records which bits go over
well and where he needs to make adjustments. The few
killer lines that survive will form the backbone of his new
show .
I know of executives and investors who keep a “decision
journal” in which they record the major decisions they
make each week, why they made them, and what they
expect the outcome to be. They review their choices at the
end of each month or year to see where they were correct
and where they went wrong. *
Improvement is not just about learning habits, it’s also
about ﬁne-tuning them. Reﬂection and review ensures that
you spend your time on the right things and make course
corrections whenever necessary—like P at Riley adjusting
the eﬀort of his players on a nightly basis. Y ou don’t want
to keep practicing a habit if it becomes ineﬀective.
Personally , I employ two primary modes of reﬂection and
review . Each December , I perform an Annual Review , in
which I reﬂect on the previous year . I tally my habits for the
year by counting up how many articles I published, how
many workouts I put in, how many new places I visited, and
more. * Then, I reﬂect on my progress (or lack thereof) by
answering three questions:
1. What went well this year?
2. What didn’t go so well this year?
3. What did I learn?
Six months later , when summer rolls around, I conduct
an Integrity Report . Like everyone, I make a lot of
mistakes. My Integrity Report helps me realize where I
went wrong and motivates me to get back on course. I use
it as a time to revisit my core values and consider whether I
have been living in accordance with them. This is when I
reﬂect on my identity and how I can work toward being the
type of person I wish to become. *
My yearly Integrity Report answers three questions:
1. What are the core values that drive my life and work?
2. How am I living and working with integrity right now?
3. How can I set a higher standard in the future?
These two reports don’t take very long—just a few hours
per year—but they are crucial periods of reﬁnement. They
prevent the gradual slide that happens when I don’t pay
close attention. They provide an annual reminder to revisit
my desired identity and consider how my habits are helping
me become the type of person I wish to be. They indicate
when I should upgrade my habits and take on new
challenges and when I should dial my eﬀorts back and
focus on the fundamentals.
Reﬂection can also bring a sense of perspective. Daily
habits are powerful because of how they compound, but
worrying too much about every daily choice is like looking
at yourself in the mirror from an inch away . You can see
every imperfection and lose sight of the bigger picture.
There is too much feedback. Conversely , never reviewing
your habits is like never looking in the mirror . You aren’t
aware of easily ﬁxable ﬂaws—a spot on your shirt, a bit of
food in your teeth. There is too little feedback. P eriodic
reﬂection and review is like viewing yourself in the mirror
from a conversational distance. Y ou can see the important
changes you should make without losing sight of the bigger
picture. Y ou want to view the entire mountain range, not
obsess over each peak and valley .
Finally , reﬂection and review oﬀers an ideal time to
revisit one of the most important aspects of behavior
change: identity .
HOW TO BREAK THE BELIEFS THA T HOLD Y OU BACK
In the beginning, repeating a habit is essential to build up
evidence of your desired identity . As you latch on to that
new identity , however , those same beliefs can hold you back
from the next level of growth. When working against you,
your identity creates a kind of “pride” that encourages you
to deny your weak spots and prevents you from truly
growing. This is one of the greatest downsides of building
habits.
The more sacred an idea is to us—that is, the more
deeply it is tied to our identity—the more strongly we will
defend it against criticism. Y ou see this in every industry .
The schoolteacher who ignores innovative teaching
methods and sticks with her tried-and-true lesson plans.
The veteran manager who is committed to doing things “his
way.” The surgeon who dismisses the ideas of her younger
colleagues. The band who produces a mind-blowing ﬁrst
album and then gets stuck in a rut. The tighter we cling to
an identity , the harder it becomes to grow beyond it.
One solution is to avoid making any single aspect of your
identity an overwhelming portion of who you are. In the
words of investor P aul Graham, “ keep your identity small.”
The more you let a single belief deﬁne you, the less capable
you are of adapting when life challenges you. If you tie
everything up in being the point guard or the partner at the
ﬁrm or whatever else, then the loss of that facet of your life
will wreck you. If you’re a vegan and then develop a health
condition that forces you to change your diet, you’ll have an
identity crisis on your hands. When you cling too tightly to
one identity , you become brittle. Lose that one thing and
you lose yourself .
For most of my young life, being an athlete was a major
part of my identity . After my baseball career ended, I
struggled to ﬁnd myself . When you spend your whole life
deﬁning yourself in one way and that disappears, who are
you now?
Military veterans and former entrepreneurs report
similar feelings. If your identity is wrapped up in a belief
like “I’m a great soldier ,” what happens when your period
of service ends? F or many business owners, their identity is
something along the lines of “I’m the CEO” or “I’m the
founder .” If you have spent every waking moment working
on your business, how will you feel after you sell the
company?
The key to mitigating these losses of identity is to
redeﬁne yourself such that you get to keep important
aspects of your identity even if your particular role
changes.
“I’m an athlete” becomes “I’m the type of person who
is mentally tough and loves a physical challenge.”
“I’m a great soldier” transforms into “I’m the type of
person who is disciplined, reliable, and great on a
team.”
“I’m the CEO” translates to “I’m the type of person
who builds and creates things.”
When chosen eﬀectively , an identity can be ﬂexible
rather than brittle. Like water ﬂowing around an obstacle,
your identity works with the changing circumstances rather
than against them.
The following quote from the Tao Te Ching  encapsulates
the ideas perfectly:
Men are born soft and supple;
dead, they are stiﬀ and hard.
Plants are born tender and pliant;
dead, they are brittle and dry .
Thus whoever is stiﬀ and inﬂexible
is a disciple of death.
Whoever is soft and yielding
is a disciple of life.
The hard and stiﬀ will be broken.
The soft and supple will prevail.
—LAO TZU
Habits deliver numerous beneﬁts, but the downside is
that they can lock us into our previous patterns of thinking
and acting—even when the world is shifting around us.
Everything is impermanent. Life is constantly changing, so
you need to periodically check in to see if your old habits
and beliefs are still serving you.
A lack of self -awareness is poison. Reﬂection and review
is the antidote.
Chapter Summary
The upside of habits is that we can do things without
thinking. The downside is that we stop paying attention
to little errors.
Habits + Deliberate Practice = Mastery
Reﬂection and review is a process that allows you to
remain conscious of your performance over time.
The tighter we cling to an identity , the harder it
becomes to grow beyond it.