Time	Management	&	The	 Eisenhower	Box 	
On	a	farm	there	is	always	more	to	do	than	time	to	do	it.	Time	 management	skills	and	systems	are	crucial	for	
prioritizing	daily,	weekly,	and	monthly	tasks,	delegation	de cisions,	annual	planning,	economic	viability,	
meeting	market	demands,	and	accomplishing	a	healthy	personal	l ife.		
	
Put	simply,	effective	time	management	is	a	fundamental	and	cru cial	component	of	farm	and	personal	 success.		
	
A	first	step	to	effective	time	management	is	to	categorize	
the	tasks	to	be	done	based	on	how	urgent	and	how	
important	they	truly	are.		
	
Urgent	Actions:	Things	that	you	feel	you	need	to	react	to	now	or	 very	soon.	
Important	Actions:	Things	that	contribute	to	y our	long-term	mission,	values,	and	goals.		
	
Some	things	are	urgent	and	important,	such	as	a	broken	fence	a nd	
cows	out.	They	can	pull	us	away	from	the	important	work	at	hand.	
Imagine	you	have	to	stop	planting	to	deal	with	the	cows.	Then	 it	rains,	
and	you	didn’t	have	the	planting	finished.	Like	a	line	of	dominos, 	other	
areas	of	farm	work	and	our	personal	lives	fall.		
	
Other	things	may	feel	urgent	but	might	not	be	important—such 	as	the	
phone	ringing —and	distract	us	from	tasks	that	are	important.		
	
The	Eisenhower	Box	is	a	useful	tool	to	for	taking	action	an d	organizing	
your	time.	The	format	breaks	tasks	into	1	of	4	categories	base d	on	
urgency	and	importance.	Separating	these	is	simple	enough	 to	do	once.	
Doing	it	continually	can	be	challenging.	The	box	provides 	a	framework	
to	do	it	consistently.	Consistency	is	key	to	success.	
	
There	are	many	ways	to	use	the	Eisenhower	box.	It	can	be	us ed	for	planning	on	a	daily,	weekly,	monthly,	or	
annual	basis,	or	record	keeping	and	analysis.	A	few	ways	to 	consider	are:	
	
• Make	your	work	plans	and	to- do-lists	in	it.	Doing	so	will	 hold	you	to	prioritizing	tasks	effectively.	It	will	
also	develop	prioritization	habits	and	analysis	skills.	Keep	b lank	copies	where	you	do	your	daily	planning:	at	
your	desk,	on	your	clipboard ,	etc.	A	template	is	provided	in	this	document.	
• Record	and	analyze. 	As	you	go	through	the	busy	season,	capture	farm	activities	 in	the	category	that	you	
want	them	to	happen	in	the	future.	For	example,	if	you	find	 yourself	writing	a	CSA	newsletter	at	midnight	
the	night	before	distribution	in	the	heat	of	harvest,	you	mi ght	note	in	the	Important	and	Not	Urgent	box	
that	next	year	you	will	create	 CSA	newsletters	in	January,	and	 only	finalize	them	with	a	bit	of	current	news	
during	the	busy	season.	After	recording	activities	for	a	p eriod	of	time,	you	will	be	able	to	create	an	annual	
work	plan.	It	can	be	close	to	impossible	to	make	system	chan ges	on	a	farm	during	the	busy	season.	It’s	
important	to	capture	what	needs	improvement	so	you	can	attend	to 	it	later	when	you	have	time.	Without	
recording,	things	are	often	forgotten	and	the	same	ineffici ent	process	is	repeated	again,	year	after	year.	
• Analyze	the	Delete	box. 	Items	that	fall	into	the	not	important	&	not	urgent	box	may	just	 be	old	habits	to	
be	gotten	rid	of,	however	they	might	be	serving	a	person al	need	that	is	not	readily	apparent.	Is	there	a	
reason	you	do	these	things?	Do	they	provide	down	time?	C onnection,	or	some	other	personal	need?	You	
may	be	better	served	recognizing	the	personal	need	and	fin ding	a	more	effective	way	to	meet	it.	
		The	Eisenhower	Box 	
	 URGENT	NOT	URGENT 	IMPORTANT 	
	1.	DO	
Do	it	now. 	
		2.	DECIDE 	
Schedule	a	time	
to	do	it.		
	NOT	IMPORTANT 	3.	DELEGATE 	
Who	can	do	it	
for	you?	4.	DELETE 	
Eliminate	it .	
	
	1.	Time	management	is	a	work	in	process. 	
2.	Time	management	is	critical	for	creating	the	
lives	we	want	to	live. 	
	
	 URGENT	 NOT	URGENT 	IMPORTANT 	
	1.	DO	
Do	it	now	&	P lan	to	move	it. 	
These	are	tasks	that	must	be	done	right	away	
or	there	could	be	a	negative	consequence.	
Prioritize	actions	that	are	in	this	category .	
However,	plan	ahead	to	keep	Box	1	as	empty	
as	possible.	Doing	so	will	minimize	emergencies	
that	disrupt	your	life	and	work.	
1. On	a	daily	basis,	be	sure	you	identify	what	
should	be	in	this	box	and	that	it	 gets	done.		
2. Look	at	what	is	falling	into	this	box	and	ask	
if	advance	planning	could	move	any	of	
these	to	Box	2	or	3	or	even	better	4.		
Task:	We	have	to	stop	planting,	go	fix	the	
fence,	and	round	up	the	cows.	NOW!		
New	Strategy:	Calendar- schedule	fence	
maintenance	during	less	busy	times	t o	move	
the	task	to	Box	2	and	minimize	the	likelihood	of	
fencing	being	a	Box	1	emergency	in	the	future.		2.	DECIDE 	
Schedule	a	time	to	do	it.	 	
For	maximum	efficiency,	it	is	best	if	the	majority	of	
your	time	is	spent	on	important	tasks	before	they	
become	urgent.	Consider	what	is	presently	happening	
in	other	boxes.	Plan	ahead	to	move	them	to	box	2 .		
1.	Calendar	schedule 	important	tasks	at	non- urgent	
times.		
-	Long	term	business	strategizing		
-	Fence	maintenance	
-	Order	supplies 	
-	Hire	staff	
-	Meet	with	buyers	
-	Write	articles	
-	Respond	to	emails	and	phone	calls	at	a	planned	time	
2.	Designate	and	protect	time 	for	your	personal	
needs.		
-	Exercising 	
-	Time	with	family	and	friends	
	NOT	IMPORTANT 	3. DELEGATE		
Who	can	do	it	for	you? 	
This	box	challenges	us	to:	
1.		Address	the	feeling	of	urgency,	and		
2.	Helps	us	delegate	tasks	to	others .		
1.	Some	things 	create	the	feeling	of	urgency ,	
but	actually	aren’t	urgent	and	aren’t	
important.	Sometimes	they	need	to 	be	
moved	to	a	different	box	or	delegated.	
Task:	The	phone	ringing	 feels	urgent	but	 most	
of	the	calls	are	not	important.	Should	I	answer	
it	or	use	other	strategies	such	as:	
- Schedule	important	calls	in	box	2.	
- Have	voice	mail	manage	incoming	ca lls.	
- Set	up	a	special	ring	for	family,	buyers,	and	
other	important	calls	to	reach	me.	
2. DELEGATE:	Is	it	important	that	YOU 	do	this	
task?	Is	there	a	better	use	of	your	time?	
Who	can	do	it	for	you?		
Task:	I	am	the	fastest	corn	picker,	but	I	can’t	
pick	all	300	cartons.	My	time	is	best	spent	
inspecting	the	field,	and	managing	the	 corn	
harvest	crew	than	trying	to	pick	a	lot 	myself.		
Task:	If	I	rebuild	this	carburetor	it	will	take	me	
3	hours.	Bill	will	do 	it	for	$50.	I	need	it	NOW,	
can’t	schedule	it	for	winter,	and	right	now	lost	
productivity	is	worth	more	than	$50.	4.	DELETE 	
Eliminate	it. 	
The	Eisenhower	box	is	particularly	useful	because	it	
pushes	us 	to	question	whether	an	action	is	necessary.	
The	fastest	way	to	get	 it	done	may	be	to	eliminate	the	
action	entirely.	T here	may	be	tasks	or	behaviors	that:	
1.	Could	be	eliminated	with	a	different	system.	 	
- Task:	Scraping	and	repainting	the	worktables	in	the	
packing	shed.		
Eliminate:	Replace	them	with	stainless	steel.	
- Task:	Hand	writing	labels.		
Eliminate:	Link	the	invoice	to	a	label	printer.	
2.	Are	mindless	 habits	or	done 	to	avoid	other	tasks.	
-	Doing	grammar	checks	on	unfinished	writing.	Then	
deleting	the	text	in	the	content-edit.	
-	Checking	Social	Media—if	it’s	important,	move	it	to	2	
-	Looking	at	photos	to	avoid	writing	the	newsletter.		
-	Overeating	to	have	an	excuse	to	take	a	break.	
Keep	in	mind	you	may	be	doing	these	things	to	serve	a	
personal	need.	Ask	 why	do	I	do	these	things ?	Are	they	
a	waste	of	time	or	do	they	meet	a	personal	need	such	
as	introspection	time,	connection	or	other?	Ideally,	
we’ll	recognize	the	need	and	plan	a	more	effective	
way	to	meet	it.	Ex:	Am	I	grammar	checking	to	get	
distance	from	the	work?	Would	I	be	better	served	
going	for	a	short	walk	to	clear	my	head?	
©	2017	Atina	Diffley	 		 	 	 	 	 Table	format	and	some	paraphrased	text	from:	https://jamesc lear.com/eisenhower -box	
Time	Management	&	The	Eisenhower	Box 	
	
	 URGENT	 NOT	URGENT	
DO	
Do	it	now.	And	plan	to	move	it.	DECIDE	
Schedule	a	time	to	do	it. 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	IMPORTANT	
		 	
DELEGATE		
Who	can	do	it	for	you?		DELETE	
Eliminate	it.	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	
	 	NOT	IMPORTANT	
	 	
	
©	2017	Atina	Diffley	 	||	Comments	focused	on	improving 	this	resource ,	and	requests	to	 reproduce	it	for	educational	purposes	 can	be	sent	to	
atina@organicfarmingworks.com