EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 45CHAPTER 6
Use the ABCDE Method Continually
“The first law of success is concentration –
to bend all the energies to one point, and to go directly to that point,
looking neither to the right or to the left.”
William Mathews
The more thought you invest in planning and setting priorities before
you begin, the more important things you will do and the faster you
will get them done once you get started.
The more important and valuable the task is to you, the more likely
you will be motivated to overcome procrastination and launch
yourself into the job.
The ABCDE Method is a powerful priority setting technique that you
can use every single day. This technique is so simple and effective
that it can, all by itself, make you one of the most efficient and
effective people in your field.
Think on Paper
The power of this technique lies in its simplicity . Here’s how it works:
You start with a list of everything you have to do for the coming day.
Think on paper.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 46You then place an A, B, C, D or E before each item on your list before
you begin the first task.
An "A" item is defined as something that is very important. This is
something that you must do. This is a task for which there can beserious consequences if you do it or fail to do it, like visiting a key
customer or finishing a report for your boss that she needs for an
upcoming board meeting. These are the frogs of your life.
If you have more than one "A" task, you prioritize these tasks by
writing A-1, A-2, A-3, and so on in front of each item. Your A-1
task is your biggest, ugliest frog of all.
“Shoulds” versus “Musts”
A "B" item is defined as a task that you should do. But it only has mild
consequences. These are the tadpoles of your work life. This means
that someone may be unhappy or inconvenienced if you don't do it,
but it is nowhere as important as an "A" task. Returning an
unimportant telephone message or reviewing your email would be a
"B" task.
The rule is that you should never do a "B" task when there is an "A"
task left undone. You should never be distracted by a tadpole when
there is a big frog sitting there waiting to be eaten.
A "C" task is defined as something that would be nice to do, but for
which there are no consequences at all, whether you do it or not. "C"
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 47tasks include phoning a friend, having coffee or lunch with a
coworker or completing some personal business during work hours.
This sort of activity has no affect at all on your work life.
A "D" task is defined as something you can delegate to someone else.
The rule is that you should delegate everything that anyone else can
do so that you can free up more time for the "A" tasks that only you
can do.
An "E" task is defined as something that you can eliminate altogether
and it won't make any real difference.
This may be a task that was important at one time but which is no
longer relevant to yourself or anyone else. Often it is something you
continue to do out of habit or because you enjoy it. But every minute
that you spend on an “E” task is time taken away from a task oractivity that can make a real difference in your life.
After you have applied the ABCDE Method to your list, you will now
be completely organized and ready to get more important things
done faster.
Take Action Immediately
The key to making this ABCDE Method work is for you to now
discipline yourself to start immediately on your "A-1" task and then
stay at it until it is complete. Use your willpower to get going and
stay going on this one job, the most important single task you could
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 48possibly be doing. Eat the whole frog and don’t stop until it’s
finished completely.
Your ability to think through, analyze your work list and determine
your "A-1" task is the springboard to higher levels ofaccomplishment, and greater self-esteem, self-respect and personal
pride.
When you develop the habit of concentrating on your "A-1," most
important activity, on eating your frog, you will start getting more
done than any two or three people around you.
Eat That Frog!
1.  Review you work list right now and put an A, B, C, D or E next to
each task or activity. Select your A-1 job or project and begin on it
immediately. Discipline yourself to do nothing else until this one job
is complete.
2.  Practice this ABCDE Method every day and on every work or
project list, before you begin work, for the next month. By that time,
you will have developed the habit of setting and working on your
highest priority tasks and your future will be assured!