EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 84CHAPTER 14
Put the Pressure on Yourself
“The first requisite for success is to apply your physical and mental energies
to one problem incessantly without growing weary.”
Thomas Edison
The world is full of people who are waiting for someone to come
along and motivate them to be the kind of people they wish they
could be. The problem is that, "No one is coming to the rescue."
These people are waiting for a bus on a street where no busses pass.
As a result, if they don't take charge of their lives and put the
pressure on themselves, they can end up waiting forever. And that is
what most people do.
Only about 2% of people can work entirely without supervision. We
call these people "leaders." This is the kind of person you are meant
to be, and which you may be, it you decide to.
To reach your full potential, you must form the habit of putting the
pressure on yourself, and not waiting for someone else to come along
and do it for you. You must choose your own frogs and then make
yourself eat them in their order of importance.
Lead the Field
See yourself as a role model for others. Raise the bar on yourself. The
standards you set for your own work and behavior should be higher
than anyone else could set for you.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 85Make it a game with yourself to start a little earlier, work a little
harder and stay a little later. Always look for ways to go the extra
mile, to do more than you are paid for.
Your self-esteem, the core of your personality, has been defined by
psychologist Nathaniel Brandon as “your reputation with yourself."
You build up or pull down your reputation with yourself with
everything you do, or fail to do. The good news is that you feel betterabout yourself whenever you push yourself to do your best. You
increase your own self esteem whenever you go beyond where the
average person would normally quit.
Create Imaginary Deadlines
One of the best ways for you to overcome procrastination is by
working as though you only had one day to get your most important
jobs done before you left for a month or went on vacation.
Imagine each day that you have just received an emergency message
and that you will have to leave town tomorrow for a month. If you
had to leave town for a month, what would you absolutely make sure
that you got done before you left? Whatever your answer, go to work
on that task right now.
Another way to put pressure on yourself is to imagine that you just
received all-expenses paid one-week vacation in a beautiful resort as
a prize, but you will have to leave tomorrow morning on the vacation
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 86or it will be given to someone else. What would you be determined to
get finished before you left so that you could take that vacation?
Whatever it is, start on that one job immediately.
Successful people continually put the pressure on themselves to
perform at high levels. Unsuccessful people have to be instructed and
supervised and pressured by others.
By putting the pressure on yourself, you accomplish more and better
tasks, faster than ever before. You become a high performance, high-
achieving personality. You feel terrific about yourself, and bit by bit,
you build up the habit of rapid task completion that then goes on toserve you all the days of your life.
Eat That Frog!
1.   Set deadlines and sub-deadlines on every task and activity. Create
your own “forcing system.” Raise the bar on yourself and don’t let
yourself off the hook. Once you’ve set yourself a deadline, stick to it
and even try to beat it.
2.  Write out every step of a major job or project before you begin.
Determine how many minutes and hours you will require to
complete each phase. Then race against your own clock. Beat your
own deadlines. Make it a game, and resolve to win!