EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 41CHAPTER 5
Practice Creative Procrastination
“Make time for getting big tasks done every day.
Plan your daily workload in advance. Single out the relatively few small jobs
that absolutely must be done immediately in the morning. Then go directly
to the big tasks and pursue them to completion.”
Boardroom Reports
Creative procrastination is one of the most effective of all personal
performance techniques. It can change your life.
The fact is that you can't do everything that you have to do. You have
to procrastinate on something! Therefore, procrastinate on small tasks.
Put off eating smaller or less ugly frogs. Eat the biggest and ugliest
frogs before anything else. Do the worst first!
Everyone procrastinates. The difference between high performers
and low performers is largely determined by what they choose to
procrastinate on.
Since you must procrastinate anyway, decide today to procrastinate
on low value activities. Decide to procrastinate, outsource, delegate
and eliminate those activities that don't make much of a
contribution to your life in any case. Get rid of the tadpoles and
focus on the frogs.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 42Priorities versus Posteriorities
Here is a key point. To set proper priorities, you must set
posteriorities as well. A priority  is something that you do more of and
sooner, while a posteriority is something that you do less of and later,if at all.
Rule: “You can only get your time and your life under control to the
degree to which you discontinue lower value activities.”
One of the most powerful of all words in time management is the
word "No!" Say it politely and courteously. Say it clearly so that thereare no misunderstandings. Say it regularly, as a normal part of your
time management vocabulary.
Say "no" to anything that is not a high value use of your time and
your life. Say “no” graciously but firmly to avoid agreeing to
something against your will. Say it early and say it often. Remember
that you have no spare time. As we say, "Your dance card is full."
For you to do something new, you must complete or stop doing
something old. Getting in requires getting out. Picking up means
putting down.
Creative procrastination is the act of thoughtfully and deliberately
deciding upon the exact things you are not going to do right now, if
ever.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 43Procrastinate on Purpose
Most people engage in unconscious  procrastination. They
procrastinate without thinking about it. As a result, they
procrastinate on the big, valuable, important tasks that can havesignificant long-term consequences to their lives and careers.
You must avoid this common tendency at all costs.
Your job is to deliberately procrastinate on those tasks that are of low
value so that you have more time for those tasks that can make a big
difference in your life and work.
Continually review your duties and responsibilities to identify those
time consuming tasks and activities that you can abandon with no
real loss. This is an ongoing responsibility for you that never ends.
For example, a friend of mine, when he was single, was an avid
golfer. He liked to golf three and four times a week, three to four
hours each time.
Over a period of years, he started a business, got married and had
two children. But he still played golf three to five times a week until
he finally realized that his time on the golf course was causing him
enormous stress at home and at the office. It was only by
abandoning most of his golf games that he could get his life back
under control.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 44Set Posteriorities on Time Consuming Activities
Continually review your life and work to find those time consuming
tasks and activities that you can abandon with no real loss. Cut downon television watching and spend the time saved with your family, orreading or exercising, or doing something that enhances the quality
of your life.
Look at your work activities and identify the tasks that you could
delegate or eliminate to free up more time for the work that really
counts. Begin today to practice creative procrastination, to set
posteriorities wherever and whenever you can. This decision alonecan enable to get your time and your life under control.
Eat That Frog!
1.   Practice zero-based thinking on every part of your life. Ask
yourself continually, “If I was not doing this already, knowing what I
now know, would I start it up, or get into it again today?” If it is
something you would not start up again today, knowing what you
now know, it is a prime candidate for abandonment or creative
procrastination.
2.  Examine each of your personal and work activities and evaluate it
based on your current situation. Select at least one activity to
abandon immediately, or at least, deliberately put off until your more
important goals have been achieved.