EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 96CHAPTER 17
Get Out Of the Technological Time Sinks
“There is more to life than just increasing its speed.”
Ghandhi
Technology can be your best friend or your worst enemy. As we race
into the 21st century, bombarded by information from all sides, many
people seem to have an irresistible, if not obsessive, need tocommunicate continually and non-stop with people everywhere – in
their personal and business lives.
This incessant, non-stop compulsion to communicate, entailing the
continuous use of cell phones, Blackberries, personal digital
assistants, Internet – both wireless and connected, and various
contact management systems like Microsoft Outlook, Maximizer andothers, tends to leave a person psychologically breathless. He or she
has no time to stop, smell the roses and collect his thoughts.
You Have a Choice
At the same time, there are many high-powered, hard-working,
highly productive people functioning in the dead center of
communications technology who are not overwhelmed by
technology. They seem to have their lives largely under control.
Bill Gross, Manager of more than 600 billion dollars in fixed income
funds and bonds, is famous for exercising regularly and meditating
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 97daily to keep centered while using no technology at all. He turns off
his cell phone, cuts off his live phone, leaves his Blackberry in his
office, and goes about his daily business without the continuous
interruptions of people who have an overwhelming need to stayconnected. And he says that he never misses an important message.
For you to stay calm, clear headed and capable of performing at your
best, you need to detach on a regular basis from the technology andcommunication devices that can overwhelm you if you are notcareful.
Don’t Become Addicted
In Washington not long ago, I was at a business luncheon with a
roomful of high-level executives. Prior to the beginning the luncheon,
one of the organizers stood up and gave a short grace. Everyonebowed their head. When the grace was over, the luncheon began.
However, at my table, four or five out of the eight people seemed to
have been greatly affected by the prayer that had preceded the
luncheon. They still had their heads down with their hands in their
lap, even when they served the food. Each of them seemed to be lost
in deep thought over the profound questions of the day.
Then I realized that they were not praying at all. Each of them was
intensely focused on their Blackberries, sending and receiving email,
working their little keyboards like frantic teenagers playing a video
game. They were all lost to the world around them as they messaged
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 98back and forth, some of them with other people in the same room.
They had fallen into a technological trap, a deep sink full of
information exchange in which they were drowning.
Technology is Your Friend
The purpose of modern technology is largely to increase the speed,
efficiency and accuracy of the transfer of information of all kinds.Technology is meant to help us to improve the quality of our lives byenabling us to accomplish our key tasks and communicate with the
key people in our world faster and more efficiently than ever before.
But the use of communications technology can quickly become a
form of addiction. People get up in the morning and immediately
check to see if there were any phone calls or voice mail messages on
their cell phones. They then race to their computers to pull up theiremail to see if anyone communicated with them overnight. They call
the office to find out if anyone has done or said anything that they
should know about in the last few hours. They check their Microsoft
Outlook, their personal digital assistants, their Blackberries and
whatever other form of communications technology they are using
every five or six minutes to make sure that they are not missing
anything. This has to stop before it gets out of control.
Take Back Your Time
One of my clients, with distributors in 19 states, found himself bound
and chained to his computer, receiving and responding to emails
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 99several hours each day. The more time he spent at his computer, the
fewer of his other important tasks he was able to get done. The stress
of these tasks, building up like an avalanche overhang, started to
affect his personality, his health and his sleeping habits.
Using the principles taught in Eat That Frog!, we taught him about
the 80/20 Rule and how it applies to emails. Fully 80% of the emails
that you receive are of no value, and should not even be opened.They should be deleted immediately.
Of the remaining 20%, only 20% of those, or 4% of your emails,
actually require an immediate response of some kind. The other 16%can be ignored temporarily, or transferred to an action folder where
they can be dealt with one at a time.
Standardize and Delegate
My client felt that there was no one who had the ability to sort out his
emails, more than 300 per day, and that he had to do it all himself, no
matter how much time it took. We encouraged him to sit down with
his secretary and go through his emails, showing her which ones
were important, which ones were unimportant and how to deal with
the most common questions and requests.
To his surprise, within two hours, his secretary knew enough to
handle most of his emails for him. From then on, she would come in
each morning and delete the 80%of emails that were of no value. She
would transfer the essential emails requesting personal action by her
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 100boss into a separate folder. If there were a question on an email, she
would transfer it to a “process” folder for him to look at at his
convenience.
At our next meeting, he told me that he had tracked the time savings
of this simple exercise and calculated that he was now saving 23
hours per week of work that he could then spend eating his frogs,
and getting his most important tasks completed.
This simple exercise transformed his life, reduced his stress levels,
improved his health and energy and made him a much more relaxed
and positive person.
Here is a question for you: “How would your life change if you had
an extra 23 hours each week, with which to think, work, plan, talk
with key coworkers or even go for a walk with your spouse?”
Refuse to Be a Slave
A journalist for Fortune magazine wrote recently that, when he
arrived back at the office after a two-week vacation, there were more
than 700 emails waiting for him. He realized that it would take him a
week to get through them all, during which time he wouldn’t be able
to tackle any of the projects waiting on his desk.
For the first time in his email career, he took a deep breath, and
punched the “Delete All” button, erasing those 700 emails forever.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 101He then turned and got busy with the projects that were really
important to him and his company.
 His explanation was simple. He said, “I realized that, just because
somebody sends me an email, it does not mean that they own a pieceof my life in terms of my having to reply to them, now or ever. In
addition, it occurred to me that if the email was really important, the
sender would send it again.” And that’s exactly what happened.
A Servant, Not a Master
For you to be able to concentrate on those few things that make most
of the difference in your business or personal life, you must discipline
yourself to use technology as a servant, not a master. Technology is
there to help you, not to hinder you. The purpose of technology is to
make your life smoother and easier, not to create complexity,confusion and stress.
One of the best rules in dealing with time, people and technology is
to just, “leave things off.” Resist the urge to start turning on
communication devices as soon as you wake up in the morning.
Leave the radio off. Leave the television off. Leave your cell phone
off. Leave your computer off until you have planned and organized
your day. Deliberately create zones of silence in your life where no
one and nothing can break through and reach you. Maintain your
“inner calm” by forcing yourself to stop on a regular basis and “listen
to the silence.”
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 102Sometimes to get more done of higher value, you have to stop doing
things of lower value. Keep asking yourself, “What’s important here?”
What is important for you to accomplish at work? What is important
in your personal life? Of all the things that you could do, if you couldonly do one or two of them, which ones would they be?
Continuous Contact Is Not Essential
Remember, when you go away for a day, a week or a month, on
vacation or on business, if you are out of touch with your
communications devices, nothing happens. The world seems to
continue revolving whether or not you are in continuous contact withit. Problems get solved, answers get found, the work gets done and
life continues to flow along like Old Man River. There are very few
things that are so important that they cannot wait.
People often ask me at my seminars, “But don’t you have to keep
current with the news, by reading newspapers, listening to radio and
watching television?”
I tell them, “If it is really important, someone will tell you.” If
something important happens in your life, the country or the world,
someone else can spend hours following the news for you, and they
will usually tell you on the first possible occasion.
Many people discontinue newspapers, stop watching broadcast news
on television and refuse to listen to the radio. And surprisingly
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 103enough, they remain well informed on most important subjects.
Someone always keeps them up to date. You should do the same.
Eat That Frog!
1.  Resolve today to create “zones of silence” during your day-to-day
activities. Turn off all communications devices and technology for
one hour in the morning and one hour in the afternoon. You will be
amazed at what happens: nothing!
2.  Resolve to take one full day off each week during which you do
not touch your computer, check your Blackberry or make any
attempt to keep in touch with the world of technology. At the end of
a day without continuous contact, except by voice, your mind will go
calm and clear, like water. By giving your mental batteries time to
recharge, free from the incessant interruptions of communication,
you will be more relaxed, aware and alert.