EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 120CONCLUSION
Putting It All Together
The key to happiness, satisfaction, great success and a wonderful
feeling of persona power and effectiveness is for you to develop thehabit of eating your frog, first thing every day when you start work.
Fortunately, this is a learnable skill that you can acquire through
repetition. And when you develop the habit of starting on your mostimportant task, before anything else, your success is assured.
Here is a summary of the 21 Great Ways to stop procrastinating and
get more things done faster. Review these rules and principles
regularly until they become firmly ingrained in your thinking and
actions and your future will be guaranteed.
1. Set the table: Decide exactly what you want. Clarity is essential.
Write out your goals and objectives before you begin;
2. Plan every day in advance: Think on paper. Every minute you
spend in planning can save you five or ten minutes in execution;
3. Apply the 80/20 Rule to everything: Twenty percent of your
activities will account for eighty percent of your results. Always
concentrate your efforts on that top twenty percent;
4. Consider the consequences : Your most important tasks and
priorities are those that can have the most serious consequences,
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 121positive or negative, on your life or work. Focus on these above all
else;
5. Practice creative procrastination: Since you can’t do everything,you must learn to deliberately put off those tasks that are of lowvalue so that you have enough time to do the few things thatreally count;
6. Use the ABCDE Method continually : Before you begin work on a
list of tasks, take a few moments to organize them by value andpriority so you can be sure of working on your most importantactivities:
7. Focus on key result areas: Identify and determine those resultsthat you absolutely, positively have to get to do your job well, andwork on them all day long;
8. The Law of Three: Identify the three things you do in your work
that account for 90% of your contribution and focus on getting
them done before anything else. You will then have more time foryour family and personal life;
9. Prepare thoroughly before you begin: have everything you need
at hand before you start. Assemble all papers, information, tools,work materials and numbers so that you can get started and keepgoing.
10.  Take it one oil barrel at a time: You can accomplish the biggest
and most complicated job if you just complete it one step at a time;
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 12211.  Upgrade your key skills: The more knowledgeable and skilled
you become at your key tasks, the faster you start them and the
sooner you get them done;
12.  Leverage your special talents: Determine exactly what it is that
you are very good at doing, or could be very good at, and throwyour whole heart into doing those specific things very, very well:
13.  Identify your key constraints: Determine the bottlenecks orchokepoints, internally or externally, that set the speed at whichyou achieve your most important goals and focus on alleviatingthem;
14.  Put the pressure on yourself : Imagine that you have to leave
town for a month and work as if you had to get all your majortasks completed before you left;
15.  Maximize your personal powers: Identify your periods of highest
mental and physical energy each day and structure your most
important and demanding tasks around these times. Get lots ofrest so you can perform at your best;
16.  Motivate yourself into action: Be your own cheerleader. Look for
the good in every situation. Focus on the solution rather than the
problem. Always be optimistic and constructive;
17.  Get Out of The Technological Time Sinks : Use technology to
improve the quality of your communications, but do not allow
yourself to become a slave to. Learn to occasionally turn things off,
and leave them off;
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 12318.  Slice and dice the task : Break large, complex tasks down into bite
sized pieces and then just do one small part of the task to get
started;
19.  Create large chunks of time:  Organize your days around large
blocks of time where you can concentrate for  extended periods on
your most important tasks;
20.  Develop a sense of urgency:  Make a habit of moving fast on your
key tasks. Become known as a person who does things quicklyand well;
21.  Single handle every task : Set clear priorities, start immediately
on your most important task and then work without stoppinguntil the job is 100% complete. This is the real key to highperformance and maximum personal productivity.
Make a decision to practice these principles every day until theybecome second nature to you. With these habits of personalmanagement as a permanent part of your personality, your futuresuccess will be unlimited.
Just do it! Eat that frog.