EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 9INTRODUCTION
This is a wonderful time to be alive. There have never been more
possibilities and opportunities for you to achieve more of your goalsthan exist today. And as perhaps never before in human history, youare actually drowning in options. In fact, there are so many good
things that you can do that your ability to decide among them maybe
the critical determinant of what you accomplish in life.
If you are like most people today, you are overwhelmed with too
much to do and too little time. As you struggle to get caught up, new
tasks and responsibilities just keep rolling in, like the waves of theocean. Because of this, you will never be able to do everything you
have to do. You will never be caught up. You will always be behind
in some of your tasks and responsibilities, and probably in many of
them.
The Need to Be Selective
For this reason, and perhaps more than ever before, your ability to
select your most important task at each moment, and then to get
started on that task and to get it done both quickly and well, will
probably have more of an impact on your success than any other
quality or skill you can develop.
An average person who develops the habit of setting clear priorities
and getting important tasks completed quickly will run circles
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 10around a genius who talks a lot and makes wonderful plans but who
gets very little done.
The Truth about Frogs
Mark Twain once said that if the first thing you do each morning is to
eat a live frog, you can go through the day with the satisfaction of
knowing that that is probably the worst thing that is going to happen
to you all day long.
Your "frog" is your biggest, most important task, the one you are
most likely to procrastinate on if you don't do something about it.It is also the one task that can have the greatest positive impact on
your life and results at the moment.
The first rule of frog-eating is: "If you have to eat two frogs, eat the
ugliest one first."
This is another way of saying that, if you have two important tasks
before you, start with the biggest, hardest and most important task
first. Discipline yourself to begin immediately and then to persist
until the task is complete before you go on to something else.
Think of this as a “test.” Treat it like a personal challenge. Resist the
temptation to start with the easier task. Continually remind yourself
that one of the most important decisions you make each day is your
choice of what you will do immediately and what you will do later, if
you do it at all.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 11The second rule of frog-eating is: "If you have to eat a live frog at all,
it doesn't pay to sit and look at it for very long."
The key to reaching high levels of performance and productivity is
for you to develop the lifelong habit of tackling your major task firstthing each morning. You must develop the routine of "Eating your
frog" before you do anything else, and without taking too much time
to think about it.
Take Action Immediately
In study after study of men and women who get paid more and
promoted faster, the quality of "action orientation," stands out as the
most observable and consistent behavior they demonstrate in
everything they do. Successful, effective people are those who launch
directly into their major tasks and then discipline themselves to worksteadily and single mindedly until those tasks are complete.
In our world, and especially in our business world, you are paid and
promoted for getting specific, measurable results . You are paid for
making a valuable contribution and especially, for making the mostimportant contribution that is expected of you.
"Failure to execute" is one of the biggest problems in organizations
today. Many people confuse activity with accomplishment. They talk
continually, hold endless meetings and make wonderful plans, but,
in the final analysis, no one does the job and gets the results required.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 12Develop the Habits of Success
Your success in life and work will be determined by the kinds of
habits that you develop over time. The habit of setting priorities,overcoming procrastination and getting on with your most importanttask is a mental and physical skill. As such, this habit is learnable
through practice and repetition, over and over again, until it locks
into your subconscious mind and becomes a permanent part of yourbehavior. Once it becomes a habit, it becomes both automatic andeasy to do.
This habit of starting and completing important tasks has immediate
and continuous payoff. You are designed mentally and emotionally
in such a way that task completion gives you a positive feeling. It
makes you happy. It makes you feel like a winner.
Whenever you complete a task, of any size or importance, you feel a
surge of energy, enthusiasm and self-esteem. The more important the
completed task, the happier, more confident and powerful you feel
about yourself and your world.
Important task completion triggers the release of endorphins in your
brain. These endorphins give you a natural “high.” The endorphin
rush that follows successful completion of any task makes you feel
more positive, personable, creative and confident.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 13Develop a Positive Addiction
Here is one of the most important of the so-called “secrets of
success.” It is that you can actually develop a "positive addition" toendorphins and to the feeling of enhanced clarity, confidence andcompetence that they trigger. When you develop this “addiction,”
you will, at an unconscious level, begin to organize your life in such a
way that you are continually starting and completing ever moreimportant tasks and projects. You actually become addicted, in a verypositive sense, to success and contribution.
One of the keys to your living a wonderful life, having a successful
career and feeling terrific about yourself is for you to develop the
habit of starting and finishing important jobs. At that point, this
behavior takes on a power of its own and you find it easier to
complete important tasks than not to complete them.
No Short Cuts
You remember the story of the man who stops a musician on a street
in New York and asks how he can get to Carnegie Hall. The musician
replies, "Practice, man, practice."
Practice is the key to mastering any skill. Fortunately, your mind is
like a muscle. It grows stronger and more capable with use. With
practice, you can learn any behavior or develop any habit that you
consider either desirable or necessary.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 14The Three D’s of New Habit Formation
You need three key qualities to develop the habits of focus and
concentration. They are all learnable. They are decision, discipline,and determination.
First, make a decision  to develop the habit of task completion.
Second, discipline  yourself to practice the principles you are about to
learn over and over until they become automatic. And third, back
everything you do with determination until the habit is locked in
and becomes a permanent part of your personality.
Visualize Yourself As You Want to Be
There is a special way that you can accelerate your progress toward
becoming the highly productive, effective, efficient person that youwant to be. It consists of your thinking continually about the rewards
and benefits of being an action oriented, fast moving, and focused
person. See yourself  as the kind of person who gets important jobs
done quickly and well on a consistent basis.
Your mental picture of yourself has a powerful effect on your
behavior. Visualize yourself as the person you intend to be in the
future. Your self-image, the way you see yourself on the inside,
largely determines your performance on the outside. All
improvement in your outer life begins with improvements in your
mental pictures, on the inside .
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 15 You have a virtually unlimited ability to learn and develop new
skills, habits and abilities. When you train yourself, through
repetition and practice, to overcome procrastination and get your
most important tasks completed quickly, you will move yourself ontothe fast track in your life and career and step on the accelerator.
Eat That Frog!