EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 16CHAPTER 1
Set the Table
“There is one quality that one must possess to win,
and that is definiteness of purpose, the knowledge of what one wants
and a burning desire to achieve it.”
Napoleon Hill
Before you can determine your “frog” and get on with the job of
eating it, you have to decide exactly what it is you want to achieve in
each area of your life. Clarity  is perhaps the most important concept
in personal productivity. The number one reason why some people
get more work done faster is because they are absolutely clear about
their goals and objectives and they don’t deviate from them.
The greater clarity you have regarding what you want and the steps you
will have to take to achieve it, the easier it will be for you to overcome
procrastination, eat your frog and complete the task before you.
A major reason for procrastination and lack of motivation is
vagueness, confusion and fuzzy mindedness about what it is you are
trying to do, and in what order and for what reason. You must avoid
this common condition with all your strength by striving for ever
greater clarity in your major goals and tasks.
Here is a great rule for success: "Think on paper."
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 17Only about 3% of adults have clear, written goals. These people
accomplish five and ten times as much as people of equal or better
education and ability but who, for whatever reason, have never taken
the time to write out exactly what it is they want.
There is a powerful formula for setting and achieving goals that you
can use for the rest of your life. It consists of seven simple steps. Any
one of these steps can double and triple your productivity if you arenot currently using it. Many of my graduates have increased theirincomes dramatically in a matter of a few years, or even a few
months, with this simple, seven-part method.
Step One : Decide exactly what you want.
 Either decide for yourself or sit down with your boss and discuss
your goals and objectives until you are absolutely, crystal clear aboutwhat is expected of you and in what order of priority. It is amazing
how many people are working away, day after day, on low value
tasks because they have not had this critical discussion with their
manager.
Rule: “One of the very worst uses of time is to do something very
well that need not be done at all.”
Stephen Covey says that, "Before you begin scrambling up the ladder
of success, make sure that it is leaning against the right building."
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 18Step Two: Write it down.
Think on paper. When you write your goal down, you crystallize it
and give it tangible form. You create something that you can touchand see. On the other hand, a goal or objective that is not in writing ismerely a wish or a fantasy. It has no energy behind it. Unwritten
goals lead to confusion, vagueness, misdirection and numerous
mistakes.
Step Three: Set a deadline on your goal. Set sub-deadlines if
necessary.
A goal or decision without a deadline has no urgency.  It has no real
beginning or end. Without a definite deadline accompanied by the
assignment or acceptance of specific responsibilities for completion,
you will naturally procrastinate and get very little done.
Step Four: Make a list of everything that you can think of that you
are going to have to do to achieve your goal.
As you think of new activities, add them to your list. Keep building
your list until it is complete. A list gives you a visual picture of the
larger task or objective. It gives you a track to run on. It dramatically
increases the likelihood that you will achieve your goal as you have
defined it and on schedule.
Step Five: Organize the list into a plan.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 19Organize your list by priority and sequence . Take a few minutes to
decide what you need to do first and what you can do later. Decide
what has to be done before something else and what needs to be
done afterwards. Even better, lay out your plan visually, in the formof a series of boxes and circles on a sheet of paper, with lines andarrows showing the relationship of each task to each other task.
You’ll be amazed at how much easier it is to achieve your goal when
you break it down into individual tasks.
With a written goal and an organized plan of action, you will be far
more productive and efficient than someone who is carrying his goals
around in his mind.
Step Six : Take action on your plan immediately.
Do something. Do anything. An average plan vigorously executed is
far better than a brilliant plan on which nothing is done. For you to
achieve any kind of success, execution is everything.
Step Seven : Resolve to do something every single day that moves
you toward your major goal.Build this activity into your daily schedule. You may read a specific
number of pages on a key subject. You could call on a specific
number of prospects or customers. You can engage in a specific
period of physical exercise. You can learn a certain number of new
words in a foreign language. Whatever it is, you must never miss a
day.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 20Keep pushing forward. Once you start moving, keep moving. Don’t stop.
This decision, this discipline alone, can dramatically increase your speed
of goal accomplishment and boost your personal productivity.
The Power of Written Goals
Clear written goals have a wonderful effect on your thinking. They
motivate you and galvanize you into action. They stimulate yourcreativity, release your energy and help you to overcomeprocrastination as much as any other factor.
Goals are the fuel in the furnace of achievement. The bigger your
goals and the clearer they are, the more excited you become about
achieving them. The more you think about your goals, the greater
becomes your inner drive and desire to accomplish them.
Think about your goals and review them daily. Every morning when
you begin, take action on the most important task you can
accomplish to achieve your most important goal at the moment.
Eat That Frog!
1.  Take a clean sheet of paper right now and make out a list of ten
goals you want to accomplish in the next year. Write your goals as
though a year has already passed and they are now a reality.
Use the present tense, positive and personal case so that they are
immediately accepted by your subconscious mind.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 21For example, you would write. “I earn X number of dollars per year.”
Or “I weigh X number of pounds.” Or “I drive such and such a car.”
2. Review your list of ten goals and select the one goal that, if you
achieved it, would have the greatest positive impact on your life.
Whatever that goal is, write it on a separate sheet of paper, set a
deadline, make a plan, take action on your plan and then do
something every single day that moves you toward that goal. This
exercise alone could change your life!