EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 72CHAPTER 11
Upgrade Your Key Skills
“The only certain means of success is to render more and better service than
is expected of you, no matter what your task may be.”
Og Mandino
This is one of the most important personal productivity principles of
all. Learn what you need to learn so that you can do your work in anexcellent fashion. The better  you become at eating a particular type of
frog, the more likely you are to just plunge in and get it done.
A major reason for delay and procrastination is a feeling of
inadequacy, lack of confidence or inability in a key area of the task. A
single area where you feel weak or deficient is enough to discourage
you from starting the job at all.
Continually upgrade your skills in your key result areas. Remember,
however good you are today, your knowledge and skill is becoming
obsolete at a rapid rate. As Pat Riley, the basketball coach said, "If
you're not getting better, you're getting worse."
Never Stop Learning
One of the most helpful of all time management techniques is for you
to get better at your key tasks. Personal and professional
improvement is one of the best time savers there is. The better you
are at a key task, the more motivated you are to launch into it. The
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 73better you are, the more energy and enthusiasm you have. When you
know that you can do a job well, you find it easier to overcome
procrastination and get the job done faster and better than under any
other circumstances.
One piece of information or one additional skill can make an
enormous difference in your ability to do the job well. Identify the
most important things you do and then make a plan to continuallyupgrade your skills in those areas.
Rule: “Continuous learning is the minimum requirement for success
in any field.”
Refuse to allow a weakness or a lack of ability in any area to hold youback. Everything is learnable. And what others have learned, you canlearn as well.
When I began to write my first book, I was discouraged because I
could only use the “hunt and peck” method of typing. I soon realized
that I had to learn to touch-type if I was ever going to write and
rewrite a 300-page book. So I bought a touch-typing program for my
computer and practiced for 20 to 30 minutes every day for threemonths. By the end of that time, I was typing 40-50 words per
minute. With this additional skill, I have been able to write more than
forty books that have now been published all over the world.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 74The best news is that you can learn whatever skills you need to be
more productive and more effective. You can become a touch typist if
necessary. You can become proficient expert with a computer. You
can become a terrific negotiator or a super salesperson. You can learnto speak in public. You can learn to write effectively and well. Theseare all skills you can acquire, as soon as you decide to, and make
them a priority.
Three Steps to Mastery
First, read in your field for at least one hour every day. Get up a little
earlier in the morning and read for 30-60 minutes in a book ormagazine that contains information that can help you to be more
effective and productive at what you do.
Second, take every course and seminar available on key skills that
can help you. Attend the conventions and business meetings of your
profession or occupation. Go to the sessions and workshops. Sit up
front and take notes. Purchase the audio recordings of the programs.
Dedicate yourself to becoming one of the most knowledgeable and
competent people in your field.
Third, listen to audio programs in your car. The average car owner
sits behind the wheel 500-1000 hours each year while driving from
place to place. Turn driving time into learning time. You can become
one of the smartest, most capable and highest paid people in your
field simply by listening to educational audio programs as you drive
around.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 75The more you learn and know, the more confident and motivated
you feel. You better you become, the more capable you will be of
doing even more in your field.
The more you learn, the more you can learn. Just as you can build
your physical muscles through physical exercise, you build your
mental muscles with mental exercises. And there is no limit to how
far or how fast you can advance except for the limits you place onyour own imagination.
Eat That Frog!
1.  Resolve today to become a “Do-It-To-Yourself” project. Become a
lifelong student of your craft. School is never out for the professional.
2.  Identify the key skills that can help you the most to achieve better
and faster results. Determine the core competencies that you will
need to have in the future to lead your field. Whatever they are, set a
goal, make a plan and begin developing and increasing your ability
in those areas. Decide to be the very best at what you do!