EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 22CHAPTER 2
Plan Every Day In Advance
“Planning is bringing the future into the present
so you can do something about it now.”
Alan Lakein
You have heard the old question, ”How do you eat an elephant?
Answer: One bite at a time!”
How do you eat your biggest, ugliest frog? The same way; you break
it down into specific step-by-step activities and then you start on thefirst one.
Your mind, your ability to think, plan and decide, is your most
powerful tool for overcoming procrastination and increasing yourproductivity. Your ability to set your goals, make plans and take
action on them determines the course of your life. The very act of
thinking and planning unlocks your mental powers, triggers your
creativity and increases your mental and physical energies.
Conversely, as Alex Mackenzie wrote, "Action without planning is the
cause of every failure."
Your ability to make good plans, before you begin, is a measure of
your overall competence. The better the plan you have, the easier it is
for you to overcome procrastination, to get started, to eat your frog
and then to keep going.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 23Increase Your Return on Energy
One of your top goals at work should be for you to get the highest
possible return on your investment of mental, emotional and physicalenergy. The good news is that every minute spent in planning savesas many as ten minutes in execution. It only takes about ten to twelve
minutes for you to plan out your day, but this small investment of
time will save you at least two hours (100-120 minutes) in wastedtime and diffused effort throughout the day.
You may have heard of the Six "P" Formula. It says, "Proper Prior
Planning Prevents Poor Performance."
When you consider how helpful planning can be in increasing your
productivity and performance, it is amazing how few people practice
it every single day. And planning is really quite simple to do. All youneed is a piece of paper and a pen. The most sophisticated Palm Pilot,
computer program or time planner is based on the same principle. It
is based on your sitting down and making a list of everything you
have to do before you begin.
Two Extra Hours Per Day
Always work from a list. When something new comes up, add it to
the list before you do it. You can increase your productivity and
output by 25% or more, by about two hours, from the first day that
you begin working consistently from a list.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 24Make out your list the night before, at the end of the workday. Move
everything that you have not yet accomplished onto your list for the
coming day and then add everything that you have to do the next
day. When you make out your list the evening or the night before,your subconscious mind works on your list all night long while yousleep. Often you will wake up with great ideas and insights that you
can use to get your job done faster and better than you had initially
thought.
The more time you take to make written lists of everything you have
to do, in advance, the more effective and efficient you will be.
Different Lists for Different Purposes
There are different lists that you need for different purposes. First,
you should create a master list  on which you write down everything
you can think of that you want to do some time in the future. This is
the place where you capture every idea that comes to or every new
task or responsibility that comes up.  You can then sort out the items
later.
Second, you should have a monthly list that you make up at the end
of the month for the month ahead.  This may contain items
transferred from your master list.
Third, you should have a weekly list where you plan your entire
week in advance. This is a list that is under construction as you go
through the current week.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 25This discipline of systematic time planning can be very helpful to
you. Many people have told me that the habit of taking a couple of
hours at the end of each week to plan the coming week has increased
their productivity dramatically and changed their lives completely.This technique will work for you as well.
Finally, you transfer items from your monthly and weekly lists onto
your daily list. These are the specific activities that you are going toaccomplish that day.
As you work through the day, tick off the items on your list as you
complete them. This activity gives you a visual picture ofaccomplishment. It generates a feeling of success and forward
motion.  Seeing yourself working progressively through your list
motivates and energizes you. It raises your self-esteem and self-
respect. Steady, visible progress propels you forward and helps youto overcome procrastination.
Planning a Project
When you have a project of any kind, begin by making a list of every
step that you will have to complete to finish the project from
beginning to end. Organize the project by priority and sequence. Lay
out the project in front of you on paper, or on a computer so that you
can see every step and task. Then go to work on one task at a time.
You will be amazed at how much you get done in this way.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 26As you work through your lists, you will feel more and more
effective and powerful. You will feel more in control of your life. You
will be naturally motivated to do even more. You will think better
and more creatively and you will get more and better insights thatenable you to do your work even faster.
As you work steadily through your lists, you will develop a sense of
positive forward momentum that enables you to overcome
procrastination. This feeling of progress gives you more energy and
keeps you going throughout the day.
One of the most important rules of personal effectiveness is the 10/90
Rule. This rule says that the first 10% of time that you spend
planning and organizing your work, before you begin, will save you
as much as 90% of the time in getting the job done once you get
started. You only have to try this rule once to prove it to yourself.
When you plan each day in advance, you find it much easier to get
going and to keep going. The work goes faster and smoother than ever
before. You feel more powerful and competent. You get more done
faster than you thought possible. Eventually, you become unstoppable .
Eat That Frog!
1.  Begin today to plan every day, week and month in advance. Take
a notepad or sheet of paper, or use your PDA or Blackberry,  and
make a list of everything you have to do in the next 24 hours. Add to
it as new items come up. Make a list of all your projects, the big
multi-task jobs that are important to your future.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 272.  Lay out each of your major goals, projects or tasks by priority,
what is most important, and by sequence , what has to be done first,
what comes second and so forth. Start with the end in mind and
work backward.
Think on paper! Always work from a list. You’ll be amazed at how
much more productive you become, and how much easier it is to eat
your frog.