EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 79CHAPTER 13
Identify Your Key Constraints
“Concentrate all your thoughts on the task at hand.
The sun’s rays do not burn until brought to a focus.”
Alexander Graham Bell
Between where you are today, and any goal or objective that you
want to accomplish, there is one major constraint that must beovercome before you can achieve that major goal. Your job is to
identify it clearly.
Ask yourself these questions: What is holding you back? What sets
the speed at which you achieve your goals? What determines how
fast you move from where you are to where you want to go? What
stops you or holds you back from eating the frogs that can reallymake a difference? Why aren’t you at your goal already?
These are some of the most important questions you will ever ask
and answer achieving high levels of personal productivity and
effectiveness. Whatever you have to do, there is always a limiting
factor that determines how quickly and well you get it done. Your job
is to study the task and identify the limiting factor or constraint
within it. You must then focus all of your energies on alleviating that
single chokepoint.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 80Identify the Limiting Factor
In virtually every task, large or small, there is a single factor that sets
the speed at which you achieve the goal or complete the job. What isit? Concentrate your mental energies on that one key area. This can bethe most productive use of your time and talents.
This constraint may be a person whose help or decision you need, a
resource that you require, a weakness in some part of the organizationor something else. But it the limiting factor always there and it is
always your job to find it.
For example, the purpose of a business is to create and keep a customer.
By doing this in sufficient quantities, the company makes a profit and
continues to grow and flourish.
In every business there is a limiting factor or chokepoint that determines
how quickly and well the company achieves this purpose. It may be the
marketing, the level of sales or the sales force itself. It may be the costs of
operation or the methods of production. It may be the level of cash flow
or costs. The success of the company may be determined by the
competition, the customers or the current marketplace. One of these
factors, more than anything else, determines how quickly the company
achieves its goals of growth and profitability. What is it?
The accurate identification of the limiting factor in any process and the
focus on that factor can usually bring about more progress in a shorter
period of time than any other single activity.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 81The 80/20 Rule Applied to Constraints
The 80/20 Rule also applies to the constraints in your life and in your
work. What this means is that 80% of the constraints, the factors thatare holding you back from achieving your goals, are internal. Theyare within yourself, within your own personal qualities, abilities,
habits, disciplines or competencies. Or they are contained within
your own company or organization.
Only 20% of the limiting factors are external  to you or to your
organization. Only 20% are on the outside, in the form of
competition, markets, governments or other organizations.
Your key constraint can be something small and not particularly
obvious. Sometimes it requires that you make a list of every step in
the process and examine every activity to determine exactly what it isthat is holding you back. Sometimes, it can be a single negative
perception or objection on the part of the customers that is slowing
down the entire sales process. Sometimes it is the absence of a single
feature that is holding back the growth of sales of a product or
service line.
Look into your company honestly. Look within your boss, your
coworkers and members of your staff to see if there is a key weakness
that is holding you or the company back, which is acting as a brake
on the achievement of your key goals.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 82Look Into Yourself
In your own life, you must have the honesty to look deeply into
yourself for the limiting factor or limiting skill that sets the speed atwhich you achieve your own personal goals.
Successful people always begin the analysis of constraints by asking
the question, "What is it in me that is holding me back?" They accept
complete responsibility for their lives and look to themselves for boththe cause and cure of their problems.
Keep asking, "What sets the speed at which I get the results I want?"
Strive for Accuracy
The definition of the constraint determines the strategy that you use
to alleviate it. The failure to identify the correct constraint, or the
identification of the wrong constraint, can lead you off in the wrong
direction. You can end up solving the wrong problem.
A major corporation, a client of mine, was experiencing declining
sales. They concluded that the major constraint was the sales force
and sales management. They spent an enormous amount of money
reorganizing the management and retraining the salespeople.
They later found that the primary reason that their sales were down
was a mistake made by an accountant that had accidentally priced
their products too high relative to their competition in the
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 83marketplace.  Once they revamped their pricing, their sales went
back up and they returned to profitability.
Behind every constraint or chokepoint, once it is located and alleviated
successfully, you will find another constraint or limiting factor.Whether it is getting to work on time in the morning, or building a
successful career, there are always limiting factors and bottlenecks that
set the speed of your progress. Your job is to find them and to focusyour energies on alleviating them as quickly as possible.
Often, starting off your day with the removal of a key bottleneck or
constraint fills you full of energy and personal power. It propels youinto following through and completing the job. And there is always
something. Often alleviating a key constraint or limiting factor is the
most important frog you could eat at that moment.
Eat That Frog!
1.  Identify your most important goal in life today. What is it? What
one goal, if you achieved it, would have the greatest positive effect on
your life? What one career accomplishment would have the greatest
positive impact on your work life?
2.  Determine the one constraint, internal or external that sets the
speed at which you accomplish this goal. Ask:  “Why don’t I have it
already? What is it in me that is holding me back?” Whatever your
answers, take action immediately. Do something. Do anything, but
get started.