EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 55CHAPTER 8
The Law of Three
““Do what you can with what you have right where you are.”
Theodore Roosevelt
There are three core tasks that you perform that contain most of the
value that you contribute to your business or organization. Yourability to accurately identify these three key tasks and then to focuson them most of the time is essential for you to achieve at your best.
Let me tell you a true story.
Three months after her first full day coaching session with me in San
Diego, Cynthia stood up and told the group a story. She said, “When
I came here 90 days ago, you claimed that you would show me how
to double my income and double my time off within 12 months. Thissounded completely unrealistic, but I was willing to give it a try.”
She went on. “On the first day, you asked me to write down a list of
everything that I did over the course of a week or a month. I came up
with 17 tasks that I was responsible for. My problem was that I was
completely overwhelmed with work. I was working 10 to 12 hours
per day, six days per week, and not spending enough time with my
husband and my two young children. But I didn’t see any way out.”
“I had been working for eight years for a fast-growing
entrepreneurial company in the high-tech area, but there always
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 56seemed to be an overwhelming amount of work to do and never
enough time.”
One Thing All Day Long
She continued with her story. “Once I had made up this list, you then
told me to ask this question, ‘If you could only do one thing on this
list, all day long, which one task would contribute the greatest valueto your company?’ Once I had identified that task, which was quiteeasy, I put a circle around that number.
“You then asked, ‘If you could only do one more thing on your list of
key tasks, which would be the second activity that contributes the
most value to your company?’ “
“Once I had identified the second most important task, you asked me
the same question with regard to the third most important task.
“You then said something that shocked me at the time. You said that
fully 90% of the value that you contribute to your company is
contained in those three tasks, whatever they are. Everything else
you do is either a support task or a complimentary task that could
probably be delegated, downsized, outsourced or eliminated.”
Take Immediate Action
Cynthia continued with her story. “As I looked at the three tasks, I
realized that these were the three things that I did that contributed
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 57the most value to my company. This was on a Friday. On Monday
morning, at 10 o’clock, I met with my boss and explained to him
what I had discovered. I told him that I needed his help in delegating
and outsourcing all my work except for those three key tasks. I feltthat if I could work on those three tasks exclusively, all day long, Icould more than double my contribution to the company. Then I said
to him that, if I doubled my contribution, I would like to be paid
twice as much.”
She said, “My boss was completely silent. He looked at my list of key
tasks, looked back up at me, looked at the list again and then said
‘Okay.’ It was now 10:21 AM according to the clock on the wallbehind him.”
“He said, ‘You’re right, these are the three most important things that
you do in this company, and the three things that you do the best. Iwill help you to delegate and downsize all these other minor tasks to
free you up to work full time on these three key tasks. And if you
double your contribution, I will pay you twice as much.”
Transform Your Life
Cynthia concluded her story by saying, “He did, then I did, then he
did. He helped me delegate and assign my minor tasks so I could
concentrate on my top three jobs. As a result, I doubled my output
over the next 30 days, and he doubled my income.”
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 58She said, “I had been working very hard for more than eight years
and I doubled my income in less than one month by focusing all my
time and energy on my three key tasks. Not only that, instead of
working 10 and 12 hour days, I work from 8:00 to 5:00 and spendtime in the evenings and on the weekends with my husband and mychildren. Focusing on my key tasks has transformed my life.”
Perhaps the most important word in the world of work is
“contribution.” Your rewards, both financial and emotional, willalways be in direct proportion to your results, to the value of your
contribution. If you want to increase your rewards, you must focus
on increasing the value of what you do. You must dedicate yourselfto contributing more results to your company. And there are always
three key tasks that contribute the most.
The Quick List Method
Here is an exercise that we give to our coaching clients very early in
the process. We give them a sheet of paper and then ask them, “In 30
seconds, write down your three most important goals in life, right
now.”
What we have found is that when you only have 30 seconds to write
your three most important goals, your answers will be as accurate as
if you had 30 minutes or three hours. Your subconscious mind seems
to go into a form of “hyper-drive” and your three most important
goals will pop out of your head and onto the paper, often to the
surprise of the person doing the exercise.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 59In 80% or more of cases, the three common goals that most people
have are first, a financial and career goal; second, a family or personal
relationship goal; and third, a health or a fitness goal.
And this is as it should be. These are the three most important areas
of life. If you give yourself a grade on a scale of one to ten, with one
being the lowest and ten being the highest, and apply this scale to
each of these three areas, you can immediately identify where youare doing well in life and where you need some improvement. Try ityourself and see. Give this test to your spouse or your children. The
answers can be quite revealing.
Later in our coaching program, we expand this exercise by asking the
following questions:
1. What are your three most important business or career  goals,
right now?
2. What are your three most important family or relationship
goals, right now?
3. What are your three most important financial goals, right now?
4. What are your three most important health goals, right now?
5. What are your three most important personal and professionaldevelopment goals, right now?
6. What are your three most important social and community
goals, right now?
7. What are your three biggest problems or concerns in life, right
now?
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 60When you force yourself to ask and answer these questions in 30
seconds or less, you will often be amazed at the answers. Whatever
your answers, they will usually be an accurate snapshot of your true
situation in life at the moment. These answers will tell you what isreally important to you.
While you are setting goals and priorities, getting organized,
concentrating single-mindedly on one task at a time, and discipliningyourself to complete your most important tasks, you must neverforget that your ultimate goal is to live a long, happy and healthy life.
Time Management Is a Means to an End
The main reason that you develop time management skills is so that
you can get everything that is really important in your work
completed so that you can free up more and more time to do thethings in your personal life that give you the greatest happiness and
satisfaction.
Fully 85% of your happiness in life will come from happy
relationships with other people, especially those closest to you, and
the members of your family. The critical determinant of the quality of
your relationships is the amount of time that you spend face to face
with the people you love, and who love you in return.
The purpose of time management skills, of eating that frog, and
getting more done in less time, is to enable you to spend more “face
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 61time” with the people you care about, doing the things that give you
the greatest amount of joy in life.
Rule: It is quality  of time at work that counts and quantity of time at
home that matters.
Work All the Time You Work
To keep your life in balance, you should resolve to work all the time
you work. When you go to work, put your head down and work thewhole time. Start a little earlier, stay a little later, and work a littleharder. Don’t waste time. Every minute that you spend in idle chit
chat with coworkers is time taken away from the work that you must
accomplish if you want to keep your job.
Even worse, time that you waste at work often has to be taken away
from the members of your family. You either have to stay late or take
work home and work in the evenings. By not working effectively andefficiently during your workday, you create unnecessary stress and
you deprive the members of your family of the very best person you
can possibly be.
 There is a story of a little girl who goes to her mother and asks,
“Mommy, why does daddy bring a briefcase full of work home each
night and never spends any time with the family?”
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 62The mother replies sympathetically, “Well honey, you have to
understand, daddy can’t get his work done at the office so he has to
bring it home and get caught up here.”
The little girl then asks, “If that’s the case, why don’t they put him in
a slower class?”
Balance Is Not an Option
One of the most famous sayings of the ancient Greeks was
“Moderation in all things.”
You need balance between your work and your personal life. You
need to set priorities at work and concentrate on your most valuable
tasks. At the same time, you must never lose sight of the fact that the
reason for working efficiently is so that you can enjoy a higherquality of life at home with your family.
Sometimes people come up to me and ask, “How do I achieve
balance between my work and my home life?”
I ask them in return, “How often does a tight rope walker balance
when he is on the high wire?”
After a few seconds of thinking, they almost always say, “All the
time.”
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 63I say, “That is the same situation with balance between family and
home life. You have to do it all the time. You never reach a point
where you have attained it perfectly. You have to work at it.”
Your goal should be to perform at your very best at work, to get the
very most done and enjoy the very highest level of rewards possible
for you in your career. Simultaneously, you must always remember
to “smell the flowers along the way.” Never lose sight of the realreasons why you work as hard as you do, and why you are sodetermined to accomplish the very most with the time that you
invest. The more time you spend face-to-face with the people you
love, the happier you will be.
Eat That Frog!
1.  Determine the three most important things that you do in your
work. Ask, “If I could only do one thing all day long, which one task
contributes the greatest value to my career?” Do this exercise two
more times. Once you have identified your “Big Three” concentrate
on them single mindedly all day long.
2.  Identify your three most important goals in life, in each area.
Organize them by priority. Make plans for their accomplishment, and
work on your plans every single day. You will be amazed at what
you achieve in the months and years ahead.