EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 76CHAPTER 12
Leverage Your Special Talents
“Do your work. Not just your work and no more, but a little more
for the lavishings sake – that little more that is worth all the rest.”
Dean Briggs
You are remarkable! You have special talents and abilities that make
you different from every other person who has ever lived. There arefrogs you can eat, or learn to eat, that can make you one of the most
important people in your business or organization.
There are certain things that you can do, or that you can learn to do,
that can make you extraordinarily valuable to yourself and to others.
Your job is to identify your special areas of uniqueness and then to
commit yourself to becoming very, very good in those areas.
Increase Your Earning Ability
Your most valuable asset, in terms of cash flow, is your "earning
ability." Your ability to work enables you to bring tens of thousands
of dollars into your life every year by simply applying your
knowledge and skills to your world. This is your ability to eat specific
frogs faster and better than others.
You could lose everything you own - your house, your car, your job,
your bank account- but as long as you still had your earning ability,
you could make it all back and more besides.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 77Take stock of your unique talents and abilities on a regular basis.
What is it that you do especially well? What are you good at? What
do you do easily and well that is difficult for other people? Looking
back at your career, what has been most responsible for your successin life and work to date? What have been the most significant frogsyou have eaten in the past?
Do What You Love to Do
You are designed in such a way that you will most enjoy doing the
very things that you have the ability to be the very best at. What is it
that you enjoy the most about your work? What kind of frogs do youmost enjoy eating? The very fact that you enjoy something means
that you probably have within yourself the capability to be excellent
in that area.
One of your great responsibilities in life is for you to decide for
yourself what it is that you really love to do and then to throw your
whole heart into doing that special thing very, very well.
Look at your various tasks and responsibilities. What is it that you do
that gets you the most compliments and praise from other people?
What do you do that positively affects the work and performance of
other people more than anyone else?
Successful people are invariably those who have taken the time to
identify what they do well and most enjoy. They know what they do
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 78that really makes a difference in their work, and they then
concentrate on that task or area of activity exclusively.
You should always focus your best energies and abilities on starting
and completing those key tasks where your unique talents andabilities enable you to do it well and make a significant contribution.
You cannot do everything but you can do those few things in which
you excel, the few things that can really make a difference.
Eat That Frog!
1.   Continually ask yourself these key questions: “What am I really
good at? What do I enjoy the most about my work? What has been
most responsible for my success in the past? If I could do any job at
all, what job would it be?”
If you won the lottery or came into an enormous amount of money,
and you could choose any job or any part of a job to do for the
indefinite future, what work would you choose?
2.  Develop a personal plan to prepare yourself to do your most
important tasks in an excellent fashion. Focus on those areas where
you have special talents, and which you most enjoy doing. This is the
key to unlocking your personal potential.