EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 108CHAPTER 19
Create Large Chunks of Time
“Nothing can add more power to your life
than concentrating all of your energies on a limited set of targets.”
Nido Qubein
This strategy requires a commitment from you to work at scheduled
times on large tasks. Most of the really important work you dorequires large chunks of unbroken time to complete. Your ability to
create and carve out these blocks of high value, highly productive
time, is central to your ability to make a significant contribution toyour work and your life.
Successful salespeople set aside a specific time period each day to
phone prospects. Rather than procrastinating or delaying on a taskthat they don’t particularly like, they resolve that they will phone for
one solid hour between 10:00 and 11:00 AM. They then discipline
themselves to follow through on their resolutions.
Many business executives set aside a specific time each day to call
customers directly to get feedback, or to return phone calls, or answer
correspondence.
Some people allocate specific 30-60 minute time periods each day for
exercise. Many people read in the great books 15 minutes each night
before retiring. In this way, over time, they eventually read dozens of
the best books ever written.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 109Schedule Blocks of Time
The key to the success of this method of working in specific time
segments is for you to plan your day in advance and specificallyschedule a fixed time period for a particular activity or task.
You make work appointments with yourself and then discipline
yourself to keep them. You set aside thirty, sixty and ninety minutetime segments that you use to work on and complete important tasks.
Many highly productive people schedule specific activities in
preplanned time slots all day long. These people build their worklives around accomplishing key tasks one at a time. As a result, they
become more and more productive and eventually produce two
times, three times and five times as much as the average person.
Use a Time Planner
A time planner, broken down by day, hour and minute, organized in
advance, can be one of the most powerful, personal productivity
tools of all. It enables you to see where you can consolidate and
create blocks of time for concentrated work.
During this working time, you turn off the telephone, eliminate all
distractions and work non-stop. One of the best work habits of all is
for you to get up early and work at home in the morning for several
hours. You can get three times as much work done at home without
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 110interruptions as you ever could in a busy office where you are
surrounded by people and bombarded by phone calls.
Make Every Minute Count
When you fly on business, you can create your office in the air by
planning your work thoroughly before you depart. When the plane
takes off, you can work non-stop for the entire flight. You will beamazed at how much work you can go through when you worksteadily in an airplane, without interruptions.
One of the keys to high levels of performance and productivity is for
you to make every minute count. Use travel and transition time, what
is often called "gifts of time" to complete small chunks of larger tasks.
Remember, the pyramids were built one block at a time. A great life
and a great career is built one task, and often, one part of a task, at a
time. Your job in time management is to deliberately and creatively
organize the concentrated time periods you need to get your key jobs
done well, and on schedule.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 111Eat That Frog!
1.  Think continually of different ways that you can save, schedule
and consolidate large chunks of time. Use this time to work on
important tasks with the most significant long-term consequences.
2.  Make every minute count. Work steadily and continuously
without diversion or distraction by planning and preparing your
work in advance. Most of all, keep focused on the most important
results for which you are responsible.