EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 116CHAPTER 21
Single Handle Every Task
“And herein lies the secret of true power. Learn, by constant practice,
how to husband your resources, and concentrate them,
at any given moment, upon a given point.”
James Allen
Eat that frog! Every bit of planning, prioritizing and organizing
comes down to this simple concept.
Your ability to select your most important task, to begin it and then to
concentrate on it single mindedly until it is complete is the key to
high levels of performance and personal productivity.
Every great achievement of mankind has been preceded by a long
period of hard, concentrated work until the job was done.
Once You Get Going, Keep Going
Single handling requires that once you begin, you keep working at
the task, without diversion or distraction, until the job is 100%
complete. You keep urging yourself onward by repeating the words
"Back to work!" over and over whenever you are tempted to stop or
do something else.
By concentrating single mindedly on your most important task, you
can reduce the time required to complete it by 50% or more.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 117It has been estimated that the tendency to start and stop a task, to
pick it up, put it down and come back to it can increase the time
necessary to complete the task by as much as 500%.
Each time you return to the task, you have to familiarize yourself
with where you were when you stopped and what you still have to
do. You have to overcome inertia and get yourself going again. You
have to develop momentum and get into a productive work rhythm.
But when you prepare thoroughly and then begin, refusing to stop or
turn aside until the job is done, you develop energy, enthusiasm andmotivation. You get better and better and more productive. You workfaster and more effectively.
Don’t Waste Time
The truth is that once you have decided on your number one task,
anything else that you do other than that is a relative waste of time.
Any other activity is just not as valuable or as important as this job,
based on your own priorities.
The more you discipline yourself to working non-stop on a single
task, the more you move down the "Efficiency Curve." You get moreand more high quality work done in less and less time.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 118Each time you stop working however, you break this cycle and move
back up the curve to where every part of the task is more difficult
and time consuming.
Self Discipline Is the Key
Elbert Hubbard defined self discipline as, "The ability to make
yourself do what you should do, when you should do it, whether youfeel like it or not."
In the final analysis, success in any area requires tons of discipline.
Self-discipline, self-mastery and self-control are the basic buildingblocks of character and high performance.
Starting a high priority task and persisting with that task until it is
100% complete is the true test of your character, your willpower andyour resolve.
Persistence is actually self-discipline in action. The good news is that
the more you discipline yourself to persist on a major task, the more
you like and respect yourself, and the higher is your self-esteem.
And the more you like and respect yourself, the easier it is for you to
discipline yourself to persist even more.
By focusing clearly on your most valuable task and concentrating
single mindedly until it is 100% complete, you actually shape and
mold your own character. You become a superior person.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 119You feel stronger, more competent, confident and happier. You feel
more powerful and productive.
You eventually feel capable of setting and achieving any goal. You
become the master of your own destiny. You place yourself on anascending spiral of personal effectiveness on which your future is
absolutely guaranteed.
And the key to all of this is for you to determine the most valuable
and important thing you could possibly do at every single moment
and then, "Eat That Frog!"
Eat That Frog!
1.  Take action! Resolve today to select the most important task or
project that you could complete and then launch into it immediately.
2.  Once you start your most important task, discipline yourself to
persevere without diversion or distraction until it is 100% complete.
See it as a “test” to determine whether you are the kind of person
who can make a decision to complete something and then carry it
out. Once you begin, refuse to stop until the job is finished.