EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 104CHAPTER 18
Slice and Dice the Task
“The beginning of a habit is like an invisible thread, but every time
we repeat the act we strengthen the strand, add to it another filament,
until it becomes a great cable and binds us irrevocably in thought and act.”
Orison Swett Marden
A major reason for procrastinating on big, important tasks is that
they appear so large and formidable when you first approach them.
One technique that you can use to cut a big task down to size is the
"Salami slice" method of getting work done.
With this method, you lay out the task in detail and then resolve to
do just one slice of the job for the time being, like eating a roll ofsalami, one slice at a time. Or like eating an elephant one bite at a
time.
Psychologically, you will find it easier to do a single, small piece of a
large project than to start on the whole job.
Often, once you have started and completed a single part of the job,
you will feel like doing just one more "slice."
Soon, you will find yourself working through the job one part at a
time, and before you know it, the job will be completed.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 105Develop a Compulsion to Closure
An important point to remember is that you have deep within you an
"urge to completion" or what is often referred to as a "compulsion toclosure."
This means that you actually feel happier and more powerful when
you start and complete a task of any kind. You satisfy a deepsubconscious need to bring finality to a job or project. This sense ofcompletion or closure motivates you to start into the next task or
project and then to persist toward final completion. This act of
completion triggers that release of endorphins in your brain that wetalked about earlier.
And the bigger the task you start and complete, the better and more
elated you feel. The bigger the frog you eat, the greater the surge ofpersonal power and energy you will experience.
When you start and finish a small piece of a task, you feel motivated
to start and finish another part, and then another, and so on. Each
small step forward energizes you. You son develop an inner drive
that motivates you to carry through to completion. This completion
gives you the great feeling of happiness and satisfaction that
accompanies any success.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 106Swiss Cheese Your Tasks
Another technique you can use to get yourself going is called the
"Swiss cheese" method of working. You use this technique to getyourself into gear by resolving to punch a hole into the task, like ahole in a block of Swiss Cheese.
You Swiss cheese  a task when you resolve to work for a specific time
period on a task. This may be as little as five or ten minutes, after
which you will stop and do something else. You will just take one
bite of your frog and then rest, or do something else.
The power of this method is similar to the salami slice method. Once
you start working, you develop a sense of forward momentum and a
feeling of accomplishment. You become energized and enthusiastic.
You feel yourself internally motivated and propelled to keep goinguntil the task is complete.
You should try the "Salami Slice" or the "Swiss cheese" method on
any task that seems overwhelming when you approach it for the first
time. You will be amazed at how helpful these techniques are in
overcoming procrastination.
I have several friends who have become best selling authors by
simply resolving to write one page, or even one paragraph per day
until the book was completed. And you can do the same.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 107Eat That Frog!
1.   Put one of these techniques into action immediately. Take a large,
complex, multi-task job that you’ve been putting off and either
“salami slice” or “Swiss cheese” it to get started.
2.  Become action-oriented. A common quality of high performance
men and women is that, when they hear a good idea, they take action
on it immediately. As a result, they learn more, faster, and get much
better results.  Don’t delay. Try it today!