EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 69CHAPTER 10
Take It One Oil Barrel at A Time
“Persons with comparatively moderate powers will accomplish much
if they apply themselves wholly and indefatigably to one thing at a time.”
Samuel Smiles
There is an old saying that, "By the yard it's hard; but inch by inch,
anything's a cinch!"
One of the best ways to overcome procrastination is for you to get
your mind off the huge task in front of you and focus on a singleaction that you can take. One of the best ways to eat a large frog is for
you to take it one bite at a time.
Confucius wrote that, "A journey of a thousand leagues begins with a
single step." This is a great strategy for overcoming procrastination
and getting more things done faster.
Crossing a Great Desert
Many years ago, driving an old Land Rover, I crossed the heart of the
Sahara Desert, the Tenezerouft, deep in modern day Algeria. By that
time, the desert had been abandoned by the French for years and the
original refueling stations were empty and shuttered.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 70The desert was 500 miles across in a single stretch, without water,
food, a blade of grass or even a fly. It was totally flat, like a broad
yellow sand parking lot that stretched to the horizon in all directions.
More than 1300 people had perished in the crossing of that stretch of
the Sahara in previous years. Often drifting sands had obliterated the
track across the desert and the travelers had gotten lost in the night,
never to be found again alive.
To counter this lack of features in the terrain as you crossed that flat
wasteland, the French had marked the track with black, 55 gallon oil
drums, five kilometers apart, which was exactly the curvature of theearth.
Because of this, wherever you were in the daytime, you could see two
oil barrels, the one you had just passed and the one five kilometersahead. And that was all you needed to stay on course.
All you had to do was to steer for the next oil barrel. As a result, we
were able to cross the biggest desert in the world by simply taking it
“one oil barrel at a time.”
Take It One Step at a Time
In the same way, you can accomplish the biggest task in your life by
disciplining yourself to take it just one step at a time. Your job is to go
as far as you can see. You will then see far enough to go further.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 71To accomplish a great task, you must step out in faith and have
complete confidence that your next step will soon become clear to
you. Remember the wonderful advice, "Leap — and the net will
appear!"
A great life, a great career is built by performing one task at a time,
quickly and well, and then going on to the next task.
Financial independence is achieved by saving a little money every
single month, year after year. Health and fitness are accomplished by
just eating a little less and exercising a little more, day after day and
month after month.
You can overcome procrastination and accomplish extraordinary
things by just taking the first step, by getting started toward your
goal and by then taking it one step, one oil barrel at a time.
Eat That Frog!
1. Select any goal, task or project in your life where you have been
procrastinating and make a list of all the steps you will need to take
to eventually complete the task.
2. Then take just one step immediately. Sometimes, all you need to do
to get started is to sit down and complete one item on the list. And
then do one more, and so on. You will be amazed at what you
eventually accomplish.