EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 32CHAPTER 4
Consider the Consequences
“Every man has become great; every successful man has succeeded,
in proportion as he has confined his powers to one particular  channel.”
Orison Swett Marden
The mark of the superior thinker is his or her ability to accurately
predict the consequences of doing or not doing something. Thepotential consequences of any task or activity are the key
determinants of how important it really is to you and to your
company. This way of evaluating the significance of a task is howyou determine what your next frog really is.
Doctor Edward Banfield of Harvard University, after more than 50
years of research, concluded that "long-time perspective" is the mostaccurate single predictor of upward social and economic mobility in
America. Long time perspective turns out to be more important than
family background, education, race, intelligence, connections or
virtually any other single factor in determining your success in life
and at work.
Your attitude toward time, your "time horizon," has an enormous
impact on your behavior and your choices. People who take the long
view of their lives and careers always seem to make much better
decisions about their time and activities than people who give very
little thought to the future.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 33Rule: "Long-term thinking improves short-term decision making."
Successful people have a clear future-orientation. They think five, ten
and twenty years out into the future. They analyze their choices and
behaviors in the present to make sure that what they are doing today
is consistent with the long-term future that they desire.
Make Better Decisions about Time
In your work, having a clear idea of what is really important to you
in the long-term makes it much easier for you to make better
decisions about your priorities in the short-term.
By definition, something that is important has long-term potential
consequences. Something that is unimportant has few or no long-
term potential consequences. Before starting on anything, you should
always ask yourself, "What are the potential consequences of doing
or not doing this task?"
Rule: "Future intent influences and often determines present actions."
The clearer you are about your future intentions, the greater
influence that clarity will have on what you do in the moment. With aclear long-term vision, you are much more capable of evaluating an
activity in the present and to assure that it is consistent with where
you truly want to end up.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 34Think about the Long Term
Successful people are those who are willing to delay gratification and
make sacrifices in the short term so that they can enjoy far greaterrewards in the long term. Unsuccessful people, on the other hand,think more about short-term pleasure and immediate gratification
while giving little thought to the long-term future.
Dennis Waitley, the motivational speaker, says, "Failures do what is
tension relieving while winners do what is goal achieving."
For example, coming in to work earlier, reading regularly in your
field, taking courses to improve your skills, and focusing on high
value tasks in your work will all combine to have an enormous
positive impact on your future.
On the other hand, coming in to work at the last moment, reading the
newspaper, drinking coffee and socializing with your coworkers may
seem fun and enjoyable in the short-term but it inevitably leads to
lack of promotion, underachievement and frustration in the long-
term.
If there is a task or activity with large potential positive
consequences, make it a top priority and get started on it
immediately. If there is something that can have large potential
negative consequences if it is not done quickly and well, that
becomes a top priority as well. Whatever your frog is, resolve to gulp
it down first thing.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 35Motivation requires motive. The greater the positive potential impact
that an action or behavior of yours can have on your life, once you
define it clearly, the more motivated you will be to overcome
procrastination and get it done quickly.
Keep yourself focused and forward moving by continually starting
and completing those tasks that can make a major difference to your
company and to your future.
Remember, the time is going to pass anyway. The only question is
how you use it and where you are going to end up at the end of the
weeks and months. And where you end up is largely a matter of theamount of consideration you give to the likely consequences of your
actions in the short term.
Thinking continually about the potential consequences of your
choices, decisions and behaviors is one of the very best ways to
determine you true priorities in your work and personal life.
Obey the Law of Forced Efficiency
This law says that, "There is never enough time to do everything, but
there is always enough time to do the most important thing."
Put another way, you cannot eat every tadpole and frog in the pond,
but you can eat the biggest and ugliest one, and that will be enough,
at least for the time being.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 36When you run out of time and the consequences for non-completion
of a key task or project can be really serious, you always seem to find
the time to get it done, often at the very last minute. When you have
no choice, when the consequences for non-completion are seriousenough, you start early, you stay late and you drive yourself tocomplete the job rather than to face the unpleasantness that would
follow if you didn't get it completed within the time limit.
Rule: "There will never be enough time to do everything you
have to do."
It has been estimated that the average person in business today,
especially managers in the age of cutbacks, is working at 110% to
130% of capacity. And the jobs and responsibilities just keep piling
up. Everyone has stacks of reading material they still have to gothrough. One study concluded recently that the average executive
has 300-400 hours of reading and projects backlogged at home and at
the office.
What this means is that you will never be caught up. Get that
wonderful idea out of your mind. All you can hope for is to be on top
of your most important responsibilities. The others will just have towait.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 37Deadlines Are an Excuse
Many people say that they work better under the pressure of
deadlines. Unfortunately, years of research indicate that this isseldom true.
Under the pressure of deadlines, often self-created through
procrastination and delay, people suffer greater stress, make moremistakes, and have to do redo more tasks, than under any otherconditions. Often the mistakes that are made when people are
working under tight deadlines lead to defects and cost overruns that
lead to substantial financial losses in the long-term. Sometimes thejob actually takes much longer to complete when people rush to get
the job done at the last minute and then have to redo it.
It is much better to plan your time carefully in advance, and then
build in a sizable buffer to compensate for unexpected delays and
diversions. How ever much time you think a task will take, add on
another 20% or more, or make a game of getting in done well in
advance of the deadline. You will be amazed at how much more
relaxed you are, and how much better a job you do.
Three Questions for Maximum Productivity
There are three questions that you can use on a regular basis to keep
yourself focused on getting your most important tasks completed on
schedule. The first question is "What are my highest value activities?"
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 38Put another way, what are the biggest frogs that you have to eat to
make the greatest contribution to your organization? To your family?
To your life in general?
This is one of the most important questions you can ask and answer.
What are your highest value activities? First, think this through for
yourself. Then, ask your boss. Ask your coworkers and subordinates.
Ask your friends and family. Like focusing the lens of a camera, youmust be crystal clear about your highest value activities before youbegin work.
The second question you can ask continually is, "What can I and only I
do, that if done well, will make a real difference?"This question comes from Peter Drucker, the management guru. It is
one of the best of all questions for achieving personal effectiveness.What can you, and only you do, that if done well, can make a real
difference?
This is defined something that only  you can do. If you don't do it, it
won't be done by someone else. But if you do do it, and you do it
well, it can really make a difference to your life and your career.
What is this particular frog for you?
Every hour of every day, you can ask yourself this question and there
will be a specific answer. You job is to be clear about the answer and
then to start and work on this task before anything else.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 39The third question you can ask is "What is the most valuable use of my
time, right now?"
What is my biggest frog of all at this moment?
This is the core question of time management. Answering this
question correctly is the key to overcoming procrastination and
becoming a highly productive person. Every hour of every day, thereis some task that is the most valuable use of your time at thatmoment. Your job is to ask yourself this question, over and over
again, and to always be working on the answer to it, whatever it is.
Do first things first and second things not at all. As Goethe said, "The things
that matter most must never be at the mercy of the things that matter least."
The more accurate your answers to these questions, the easier it will
be for you to set clear priorities, to overcome procrastination and to
get started on that one activity that represents the most valuable use
of your time.
Eat That Frog!   
1.  Review your list of tasks, activities and projects regularly.
Continually ask yourself, “Which one project or activity, if I did it in
an excellent and timely fashion, would have the greatest positive
consequences in my work or personal life?”
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 402. Determine the most important things you could be doing every
hour of every day, and then discipline yourself to work continually
on the most valuable use of your time. What is this for you, right
now?
Whatever it is that can help you the most, set it as a goal, make a plan
to achieve it and go to work on your plan immediately. Remember
the wonderful words of Goethe, “Just begin and the mind grows heated;
continue, and the task will be completed!”