EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 112CHAPTER 20
Develop A Sense of Urgency
“Do not wait; the time will never be ‘just right.’ Start where you stand,
and work with whatever tools you may have at your command,
and better tools will be found as you go along.”
Napoleon Hill
Perhaps the most outwardly identifiable quality of a high performing
man or woman is "action orientation." They are in a hurry to get their
key tasks completed.
Highly productive people take the time to think, plan and set
priorities. They then launch quickly and strongly toward their goals
and objectives. They work steadily, smoothly and continuously. As a
result, they seem to power through enormous amounts of work in thesame amount of time that the average person spends socializing,
wasting time and working on low value activities.
Working in the “Zone”
When you work on your most important tasks at a high and
continuous level of activity, you can actually enter into an amazing
mental state called "flow." Almost everyone has experienced this at
some time. Really successful people are those who get themselves
into this state far more often than the average.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 113In the state of "flow," which is the highest human state of
performance and productivity, something almost miraculous
happens to your mind and emotions.
You feel elated and clear. Everything you do seems effortless and
accurate. You feel happy and energized. You experience a
tremendous sense of calm and increased personal effectiveness.
In the state of "flow," identified and talked about over the centuries,
you actually function on a higher plane of clarity, creativity and
competence. You are more sensitive and aware. Your insight and
intuition functions with incredible precision. You see theinterconnectedness of people and circumstances around you. You
often come up with brilliant ideas and insights that enable you to
move ahead even more rapidly.
Trigger Yourself into High Performance
One of the ways you can trigger this state of flow is by developing a
"sense of urgency.” This is an inner drive and desire to get on with
the job quickly and get it done fast. This inner drive is an impatience
that motivates you to get going and to keep going. A sense of
urgency feels very much like racing against yourself.
With this ingrained sense of urgency, you develop a "bias for action."
You take action rather than talking continually about what you are
going to do. You focus on specific steps you can take immediately.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 114You concentrate on the things you can do right now to get the results
you want and achieve the goals you desire.
Fast tempo seems to go hand in hand with all great success.
Developing this tempo requires that you start moving and keepmoving at a steady rate. The faster you move, the more impelled youfeel to do even more, even faster. You enter “the zone.”
Build Up a Sense of Momentum
When you regularly take continuous action toward your most
important goals, you activate the "Momentum Principle” of success.
This principle says that although it may take tremendous amounts ofenergy to overcome inertia and get started initially, it then takes far
less energy to keep going.
The good news is that the faster you move, the more energy you have.
The faster  you move, the more you get done and the more effective
you feel. The faster you move, the more experience you get and the
more you learn. The faster you move, the more competent and
capable you become at your work.
A sense of urgency shifts you automatically onto the fast track in
your career. The faster you work and the more you get done, the
higher will be your levels of self-esteem, self-respect and personal
pride. You feel in complete control of your life and your work.
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 115Do It Now!
One of the simplest and yet most powerful ways to get yourself
started is to repeat the words, "Do it now! Do it now! Do it now!"over and over to yourself.
If you feel yourself slowing down or becoming distracted by
conversations or low value activities, repeat to yourself the words,"Back to work! Back to work! Back to work!" over and over.
In the final analysis, nothing will help you more in your career than
for you to get the reputation for being the kind of person who getsimportant work done quickly and well. This reputation will make
you one of the most valuable and respected people in your field.
Eat That Frog!
1.  Resolve today to develop a sense of urgency in everything you do.
Select one area where you have a tendency to procrastinate and make
a decision to develop the habit of fast action in that area.
2.  When you see an opportunity or a problem, take action on it
immediately. When you are given a task or responsibility, do it
quickly and report back fast. Move rapidly in every important area of
your life. You will be amazed at how much better you feel, and how
much more you get done.