EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 92CHAPTER 16
Motivate Yourself into Action
“It is in the compelling zest of high adventure and of victory,
and of creative action that man finds his supreme joys.”
Antoine de Saint-Exupery
To perform at your best, you must become your own personal
cheerleader. You must develop a routine of coaching yourself andencouraging yourself to play at the top of your game.
Most of your emotions, positive or negative, are determined by how
you talk to yourself on a minute-to-minute basis. It is not what
happens to you but the way that you interpret the things that are
happening to you that determines how you feel. It is your version of
events that largely determines whether they motivate or demotivateyou, whether they energize or de-energize you.
To keep yourself motivated, you must resolve to become a complete
optimist . You must determine to respond positively to the words,
actions and reactions of the people and situations around you. Youmust refuse to let the unavoidable difficulties and setbacks of daily
life affect your mood or emotions.
Control Your Inner Dialogue
Your level of self-esteem, how much you like and respect yourself, is
central to your levels of motivation and persistence. You should talk
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 93to yourself positively all the time to boost your self-esteem. Say
things like, "I like myself! I like myself!" over and over until you
begin to believe it and behave like a person with a high performance
personality.
To keep yourself motivated, and to overcome feelings of doubt or
fear, continually tell yourself, "I can do it! I can do it!"
When people ask you how you are, always tell them, "I feel terrific!"
No matter how you really feel at the moment, or what is happening
in your life, resolve to remain cheerful and upbeat. As Victor Franklwrote in his best selling book, Logotherapy , “The last great freedom
of mankind is the freedom to choose your attitude under any set of
external conditions.”
Refuse to complain about your problems. Keep them to yourself. As
speaker/humorist Ed Forman says, “You should never share your
problems with others because 80% of people don't care about them
anyway, and the other 20% are kind of glad that you've got them in
the first place.”
Develop a Positive Mental Attitude
In Martin Seligman’s 22 year study at the University of Pennsylvania,
summarized in his book, “Learned Optimism,” he determined that
“optimism” is the most important quality you can develop for
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 94personal and professional success and happiness. Optimistic people
seem to be more effective in almost every area of life.
It turns out that optimists have three special behaviors, all learned
through practice and repetition. First, optimists look for the good  in
every situation. No matter what goes wrong, they always look for
something good or beneficial. And not surprisingly, they always
seem to find it.
Second, optimists always seek the valuable lesson in every setback
or difficulty. They believe that , ”difficulties come not to obstruct, but to
instruct.”  They believe that each setback or obstacle contains a
valuable lesson they can learn and grow from, and they are
determined to find it.
Third, optimists always look for the solution to every problem.
Instead of blaming or complaining when things go wrong, they
become action oriented. They ask questions like, "What's the
solution? What can we do now? What's the next step?"
Third, optimists think and talk continually about their goals . They
think about what they want and how to get it, most of the time. They
think and talk about the future and where they are going rather than
the past and where they came from. They are always looking forward
rather than backward.
When you continually visualize your goals and ideals and talk to
yourself in a positive way, you feel more focused and energized. You
EAT THAT FROG!
PAGE 95feel more confident and creative. You experience a greater sense of
control and personal power.
And the more positive and motivated you feel, the more eager you
are to get started and the more determined you are to keep going.
Eat That Frog!
1.  Control your thoughts. Remember, you become what you think
about most of the time. Be sure that you are thinking and talking
about the things you want rather than the things you don’t want.
2.  Keep your mind positive by accepting complete responsibility for
yourself and for everything that happens to you. Refuse to criticize,
complain or blame others for anything. Resolve to make progress
rather than excuses. Keep your thoughts and your energy focused
forward, on the things you can do right now to improve your life,
and let the rest go