Getting Control of 
Your Life: The Five Stages of 
Mastering Workflow 
THE CORE PROCESS I teach for mastering the art of r elaxed and con- 
trolled knowledge work is a five-stage method for m anaging 
workflow. No matter what the setting, there are fiv e discrete 
stages that we go through as we deal with our work.  We (1) collect 
things that command our attention; (2) process what they mean 
and what to do about them; and (3) organize the results, which we 
(4) review as options for what we choose to (5) do. 
This constitutes the management of the "horizontal"
aspect of our lives—incorporating everything that 
has our attention at any time. 
The method is straightforward enough in princi- 
ple, and it is generally how we all go about our wo rk in 
any case, but in my experience most people can stan d 
significantly to improve their handling of each one  of 
the five stages. The quality of our workflow manage - 
ment is only as good as the weakest link in this fi ve- 
phase chain, so all the links must be integrated 
together and supported with consistent standards. 
Most people have major leaks in their collection 
process. Many have collected things but haven't 
processed or decided what action to take about them. Others m ake 
good decisions about "stuff" in the moment but lose  the value of 
that thinking because they don't efficiently organize the results. Still 
others have good systems but don't review them consistently 
enough to keep them functional. Finally, if any one  of these links is 
24 The knowledge 
that we consider 
knowledge proves 
itself in action. 
What we now 
mean by 
knowledge is 
information in 
action, 
information 
focused on results. 
—Peter F. Drucker 
CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF  MASTERING WORKFLOW 
weak, what someone is likely to choose to do at any point in time 
may not be the best option. 
The dynamics of these five stages need to be unders tood, and 
good techniques and tools implemented to facilitate  their func- 
tioning at an optimal level. I have found it very h elpful, if not 
essential, to separate these stages as I move throu gh my day. There 
are times when I want only to collect input and not  decide what to 
do with it yet. At other times I may just want to p rocess my notes 
from a meeting. Or I may have just returned from a big trip and 
need to distribute and organize what I collected an d processed on 
the road. Then there are times when I want to revie w the whole 
inventory of my work, or some portion of it. And ob viously a lot 
of my time is spent merely doing something that I n eed to get 
done. 
I have discovered that one of the major reasons man y people 
haven't had a lot of success with "getting organize d" is simply that 
they have tried to do all five phases at one time. Most, when they 
sit down to "make a list," are trying to collect th e "most important 
things" in some order that reflects priorities and sequences, with- 
out setting out many (or any) real actions to take.  But if you don't 
decide what needs to be done about your secretary's  birthday, 
because it's "not that important" right now, that o pen loop will 
take up energy and prevent you from having a totall y effective, 
clear focus on what is important. 
This chapter explains the five phases in detail. Ch apters 4 
through 8 provide a step-by-step program for implem enting an 
airtight system for each phase, with lots of exampl es and best 
practices. 
Collect 
It's important to know what needs to be collected a nd how to col- 
lect it most effectively so you can process it appr opriately. In order 
for your mind to let go of the lower-level task of trying to hang on 
25 
26 THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE 
to everything, you have to know that you have truly  captured 
everything that might represent something you have to do, and 
that at some point in the near future you will proc ess and review 
all of it. 
Gathering 100 Percent of the "Incompletes" 
In order to eliminate "holes in the bucket," you ne ed to collect and 
gather together placeholders for or representations  of all the 
things you consider incomplete in your world—that i s, anything 
personal or professional, big or little, of urgent or minor impor- 
tance, that you think ought to be different than it  currently is and 
that you have any level of internal commitment to c hanging. 
Many of the things you have to do are being collect ed for  you 
as you read this. Mail is coming into your mailbox,  memos are 
being routed to your in-basket, e-mail is being fun neled into your 
computer, and messages are accumulating on your voi ce-mail. But 
at the same time, you've been "collecting" things i n your environ- 
ment and in your psyche that don't belong where the y are, the way 
they are, for all eternity. Even though it may not be as obviously 
"in your face" as your e-mail, this "stuff" still r equires some kind 
of resolution—a loop to be closed, something to be done. Strategy 
ideas loitering on a legal pad in a stack on your c redenza, "dead" 
gadgets in your desk drawers that need to be fixed or thrown away, 
and out-of-date magazines on your coffee table all fall into this 
category of "stuff." 
As soon as you attach a "should," "need to," or "ou ght to" to 
an item, it becomes an incomplete. Decisions you st ill need to 
make about whether or not you are going to do somet hing, for 
example, are already incompletes. This includes all  of your "I'm 
going to"s, where you've decided to do something bu t haven't 
started moving on it yet. And it certainly includes  all pending and 
in-progress items, as well as those things on which  you've done 
everything you're ever going to do except acknowled ge that you're 
finished with them. 
In order to manage this inventory of open loops app ropri- 
CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF  MASTERING WORKFLOW 
ately, you need to capture it into "containers" tha t hold items in 
abeyance until you have a few moments to decide wha t they are 
and what, if anything, you're going to do about the m. Then you 
must empty these containers regularly to ensure tha t they remain 
viable collection tools. 
Basically, everything is already being collected, i n the larger 
sense. If it's not being directly managed in a trus ted external sys- 
tem of yours, then it's resident somewhere in your psyche. The fact 
that you haven't put an item in your in-basket does n't mean you 
haven't got it. But we're talking here about making sure that e very- 
thing you need is collected somewhere other than in your head. 
The Collection Tools 
There are several types of tools, both low- and hig h-tech, that can 
be used to collect your incompletes. The following can all serve as 
versions of an in-basket, capturing self-generated input as well as 
information coming from outside: 
• Physical in-basket 
• Paper-based note-taking devices 
• Electronic note-taking devices 
• Voice-recording devices 
• E-mail 
The Physical In-Basket 
The standard plastic, wood, leather, or wire tray i s the most com- 
mon tool for collecting paper-based materials and a nything else 
physical that needs some sort of processing: mail, magazines, 
memos, notes, phone slips, receipts—even flashlight s with dead 
batteries. 
Writing Paper and Pads 
Loose-leaf notebooks, spiral binders, and steno and  legal pads all 
work fine for collecting random ideas, input, thing s to do, and so 
on. Whatever kind fits your taste and needs is fine . 
27 
28 THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE 
Electronic Note-Taking 
Computers can be used to type in notes for processi ng later. And 
as character-recognition technology advances, a par ade of digital 
tools designed to capture data continues to be intr oduced. Hand- 
held devices (personal digital assistants, or PDAs)  and electronic 
legal pads can both be used to collect all kinds of  input. 
Auditory Capture 
Available auditory devices include answering machin es, voice- 
mail, and dictating equipment, such as digital or m icrocassette 
recorders. All of these can be useful for preservin g an interim 
record of things you need to remember or deal with.
E-mail 
If you're wired to the rest of the world through e- mail, your 
software contains some sort of holding area for inc oming mes- 
sages and files, where they can be stored until the y are viewed, 
read, and processed. Pagers and telephones can capt ure this kind 
of input as well. 
Higher-Tech Devices 
Now you can dictate into computers as well as hand- write into 
them. As more and more communication is morphed int o digital 
and wireless formats, it will become easier to capt ure ideas (with a 
corresponding increase in the amount of data reachi ng us that we 
need to manage!). 
"Computer!" 
"Yes, David?" 
"I need bread." 
"Yes, David." 
My needed grocery item has been collected. And as the orga- 
nizing part of the action-management process is further di gitized, 
"bread" will automatically be added to my electroni c grocery list, 
and maybe even ordered and delivered. 
CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF  MASTERING WORKFLOW 
Whether high-tech or low-tech, all of the tools des cribed above 
serve as similar in-baskets, capturing potentially useful informa- 
tion, commitments, and agreements for action. You'r e probably 
already using some version of most of them. 
The Collection Success Factors 
Unfortunately, merely having an in-basket doesn't m ake it func- 
tional. Most people do have collection devices of some sort, but 
usually they're more or less out of control. Let's examine the three 
requirements to make the collection phase work: 
1 |   Every open loop must be in your collection sys tem and out 
of your head. 
2 |   You must have as few collection buckets as you can get by with. 
3 |   You must empty them regularly. 
Get It All Out of Your Head 
If you're still trying to keep track of too many th ings in your RAM, 
you likely won't be motivated to use and empty your  in-baskets 
with integrity. Most people are relatively careless  about these tools 
because they know they don't represent discrete, wh ole systems 
anyway: there's an incomplete set of things in thei r in-basket and 
an incomplete set in their mind, and they're not ge tting any payoff 
from either one, so their thinking goes. It's like trying to play pin- 
ball on a machine that has big holes in the table, so the balls keep 
falling out: there's little motivation to keep play ing the game. 
These collection tools should become part of your l ife-style. 
Keep them close by so no matter where you are you c an collect a 
potentially valuable thought-—think of them as bein g as indis- 
pensable as your toothbrush or your driver's licens e or your glasses. 
Minimize the Number of Collection Buckets 
You should have as many in-baskets as you need and as few as you 
can get by with. You need this function to be avail able to you in 
29 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE 
every context, since things you'll want to capture may show up 
almost anywhere. If you have too many collection zo nes, however, 
you won't be able to process them easily or consist ently. 
An excess of collection buckets is seldom a problem  on the 
high-tech end; the real improvement opportunity for  most people 
is on the low-tech side, primarily in the areas of note-taking and 
physical in-basket collection. Written notes need t o be corralled 
and processed instead of left lying embedded in sta cks, note- 
books, and drawers. Paper materials need to be funn eled into 
physical in-baskets instead of being scattered over  myriad piles in 
all the available corners of your world. 
Implementing   standard   tools   for   capturing 
ideas and input will become more and more critical 
as your life and work become more sophisticated. As
you proceed in your career, for instance, you'll pr oba- 
bly notice that your best ideas about work will not
come to you at work. The ability to leverage that 
thinking with good collection devices th 
at hand is key to increased productivity. 
30 Empty the Buckets Regularly 
The final success factor for collecting should be obvious: if you 
don't empty and process the "stuff" you've collecte d, your buckets 
aren't serving any function other than the storage of amorphous 
material. Emptying the bucket does not mean that yo u have to 
finish what's in your voice-mail, e-mail, or in-basket; it  just means 
you have to take it out of the container, decide wh at it is and what 
should be done with it, and, if it's still unfinish ed, organize it into 
your system. You don't put it back into "in"! Not e mptying your 
in-basket is like having garbage cans that nobody e ver dumps—
you just have to keep buying new ones to hold all y our trash. 
In order for you to get "in" to empty, your total a ction- 
management system must be in place. Too much "stuff " is left 
piled in in-baskets because of a lack of effective systems "down- 
stream" from there. It often seems easier to leave things in "in" Men of lofty genius 
•when they are 
doing the least 
•work are the most 
active. 
—
Leonar 
CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF  MASTERING WORKFLOW 
when you know you have to do something about them b ut can't 
do it right then. The in-basket, especially for pap er and e-mail, is 
the best that many people can do in terms of organi zation—at 
least they know that somewhere in there is a reminder of some- 
thing they still have to do. Unfortunately, that sa fety net is lost 
when the piles get out of control or the inventory of e-mails gets 
too extensive to be viewed on one screen. 
When you master the next phase and know how to proc ess 
your incompletes easily and rapidly, "in" can retur n to its original 
function. Let's move on to how to get those in-bask ets and e-mail 
systems empty without necessarily having to do the work now. 
Process 
Teaching them the item-by-item thinking required to  get their 
collection buckets empty is perhaps the most critic al improve- 
ment I have made for virtually all the people I've worked with. 
When the head of a major department in a global cor poration had 
finished processing all her open items with me, she  sat back in 
awe and told me that though she had been able to re lax about 
what meetings to go to thanks to her trust in her c alendar, she had 
never felt that same relief about all the many othe r aspects of her 
job, which we had just clarified together. The acti ons and infor- 
mation she needed to be reminded of were now identi fied and 
entrusted to a concrete system. 
What do you need to ask yourself (and answer) about  each 
e-mail, voice-mail, memo, or self-generated idea th at comes your 
way? This is the component of action management tha t forms the 
basis for your personal organization. Many people t ry to "get 
organized" but make the mistake of doing it with in complete 
batches of "stuff." You can't organize what's incom ing—you can 
only collect it and process it. Instead, you organi ze the actions 
you'll need to take based on the decisions you've m ade about 
what needs to be done. The whole deal—both the processing 
and 
31 
32 THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE 
WORKFLOW DIAGRAM—PROCESSING 

CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF  MASTERING WORKFLOW 
organizing phases—is captured in the center "trunk" of the 
decision-tree model shown here. 
In later chapters, I'll coach you in significant de tail through 
each element of the process. For now, though, I sug gest you select 
a to-do list or a pile of papers from your in-baske t and assess a few 
items as we take an overview. 
What Is It? 
This is not a dumb question. We've talked about "st uff." And we've 
talked about collection buckets. But we haven't dis cussed what 
stuff is and what to do about it. For example, many of the i tems 
that tend to leak out of our personal organizing sy stems are amor- 
phous forms that we receive from the government or from our 
company—do we actually need to do something about them? And 
what about that e-mail from human resources, lettin g us know 
that blah-blah about the blah-blah is now the polic y of blah-blah? 
I've unearthed piles of messages in stacks and desk  drawers that 
were tossed there because the client didn't take ju st a few seconds 
to figure out what in fact the communication or doc ument was 
really about. Which is why the next decision is cri tical. 
Is It Actionable? 
There are two possible answers for this: YES and NO .
No Action Required If the answer is NO , there are three possibili- 
ties: 
1   |   It's trash, no longer needed. 
2   |   No action is needed now, but something migh t need to be 
done later (incubate). 
3  |   The item is potentially useful information t hat might be 
needed for something later (reference). 
These three categories can themselves be managed; w e'll get 
into that in a later chapter. For now, suffice it t o say that you need 
33 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE 
a trash basket and <Del> key for trash, a "tickler"  file or calendar 
for material that's incubating, and a good filing s ystem for refer- 
ence information. 
Actionable This is the YES group of items, stuff about which 
something needs to be done. Typical examples range from 
an e-mail requesting your participation in a corpor ate service 
project on such-and-such a date to the notes in you r in-basket 
from your face-to-face meeting with the group vice president 
about a significant new project that involves hirin g an outside 
consultant. 
Two things need to be determined about each actiona ble item: 
1 |   What "project" or outcome have you committed to ? and 
2 |   What's the next action required? 
If It's About a Project. . . You need to capture that outcome on a 
"Projects" list. That will be the stake in the grou nd that reminds 
you that you have an open loop. A Weekly Review of the list (see 
page 46) will bring this item back to you as someth ing that's still 
outstanding. It will stay fresh and alive in your m anagement sys- 
tem until it is completed or eliminated. 
What's the Next Action? This is the critical question 
for anything you've collected; if you answer it app ro- 
priately, you'll have the key substantive thing to orga- 
nize. The "next action" is the next physical, visib le 
activity that needs to be engaged in, in order to m ove 
the current reality toward completion. 
Some examples of next actions might be: 
34 • Call Fred re tel. # for the garage he recommended. 
• Draft thoughts for the budget-meeting agenda. 
• Talk to Angela about the filing system we need to s et up. 
• Research database-management software on the Web. It does not take 
much strength to 
do things, but it 
requires a great 
deal of strength to 
decide what to do. 
—Elbert 
CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF  MASTERING WORKFLOW 
These are all real physical activities that need to  happen. 
Reminders of these will become the primary grist fo r the mill of 
your personal productivity-management system. 
Do It, Delegate It, or Defer It    Once you've decided on the next 
action, you have three options: 
1 |   Do it. If an action will take less than two minutes, it sh ould 
be done at the moment it is defined. 
2 |   Delegate it. If the action will take longer than two minutes, 
ask yourself, Am I the right person to do this? If the answer 
is no, delegate it to the appropriate entity. 
3 |   Defer it. If the action will take longer than two minutes, an d 
you are the right person to do it, you will have to  defer acting 
on it until later and track it on one or more "Next  Actions" 
lists. 
Organize 
The outer ring of the workflow diagram shows the ei ght discrete 
categories of reminders and materials that will res ult from your 
processing all your "stuff." Together they make up a total system 
for organizing just about everything that's on your  plate, or could 
be added to it, on a daily and weekly basis. 
For nonactionable items, the possible categories ar e trash, 
incubation tools, and reference storage. If no action is needed on 
something, you toss it, "tickle" it for later reass essment, or file it so 
you can find the material if you need to refer to i t at another time. 
To manage actionable things, you will need a list of projects, storage 
or files for project plans and materials, a calendar, a list of reminders of 
next actions, and a list of reminders of things you're waiting for. 
All of the organizational categories need to be phy sically 
contained in some form. When I refer to "lists," I just mean 
some sort of reviewable set of reminders, which cou ld be lists on 
35 
36 THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE 
WORKFLOW DIAGRAM—ORGANIZING 

CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF  MASTERING WORKFLOW 
notebook paper or in some computer program or even file folders 
holding separate pieces of paper for each item. For  instance, the 
list of current projects could be kept on a page in  a Day Runner; it 
could be a "To Do" category on a PDA; or it could b e in a file 
labeled "Projects List." Incubating reminders (such  as "after 
March 1 contact my accountant to set up a meeting")  may be 
stored in a paper-based "tickler" file or in a pape r- or computer- 
based calendar program. 
Projects 
I define a project as any desired result that requires more than one 
action step. This means that some rather small thin gs that you 
might not normally call projects are going to be on  your "Projects" 
list. The reasoning behind my definition is that if  one step won't 
complete something, some kind of stake needs to be placed in the 
ground to remind you that there's something still l eft to do. If 
you don't have a placeholder to remind you about it , it will slip 
back into RAM. Another way to think of this is as a  list of open 
loops. 
A Partial "Projects"List 
Get new staff person on board R&D joint-venture vide o project
August vacation Produce new training compact disk 
Staff off-site retreat Establish next year's seminar  schedule 
Publish book Orchestrate a one-hour keynote 
Finalize computer upgrades      . presentation 
Update will Get proficient with videoconferencing 
Finalize budgets access 
Finalize new product line Finalize employment agreem ents 
Get comfortable with new contact- Install new backya rd lights 
management software Establish formal relationships w ith South 
Get reprints of Fortune article American rep 
Get a publicist Finalize staff policies and procedur es 
Finish new orchard planting Get a new living-room ch air 
37 
38 THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE 
Projects do not need to be listed in any particular  order, 
whether by size or by priority. They just need to b e on a master list 
so you can review them regularly enough to ensure t hat appropri- 
ate next actions have been defined for each of them . 
You don't actually do a project; you can only do action steps 
related to it. When enough of the right action steps have b een 
taken, some situation will have been created that m atches your 
initial picture of the outcome closely enough that you can call 
it "done." The list of projects is the compilation of finish lines 
we put before us, to keep our next actions moving o n all tracks 
appropriately. 
Project Support Material 
For many of your projects, you will accumulate rele vant informa- 
tion that you will want to organize by theme or top ic or project 
name. Your "Projects" list will be merely an index.  All of the 
details, plans, and supporting information that you  may need as 
you work on your various projects should be contain ed in separate 
file folders, computer files, notebooks, or binders . 
Support Materials and Reference Files Once you have organized 
your project support material by theme or topic, yo u will probably 
find that it is almost identical to your reference material and could 
be kept in the same reference file system (a "Weddi ng" file 
could be kept in the general-reference files, for i nstance). The 
only difference is that in the case of active proje cts, support mate- 
rial may need to be reviewed on a more consistent b asis to ensure 
that all the necessary action steps are identified.
I usually recommend that people store their support  materi- 
als out of sight. If you have a good working refere nce file system 
close enough at hand, you may find that that's the simplest way to 
organize them. There will be times, though, when it 'll be more 
convenient to have the materials out and instantly in view and 
available, especially if you're working on a hot pr oject that you 
need to check references for several times during t he day. File 
CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF  MASTERING WORKFLOW 
folders in wire standing holders or in stackable tr ays within easy 
reach can be practical for this kind of "pending" p aperwork. 
The Next-Action Categories 
As the Workflow Diagram makes clear, the next-actio n decision 
is central. That action needs to be the next physic al, visible behav- 
ior, without exception, on every open loop. 
Any less-than-two-minute actions that you perform, and all 
other actions that have already been completed, do not, of course, 
need to be tracked; they're done. What does need to be tracked is 
every action that has to happen at a specific time or on a specific 
day (enter these in your calendar); those that need  to be done as 
soon as they can (add these to your "Next Actions" lists); and all 
those that you are waiting for others to do (put th ese on a "Wait- 
ing For" list). 
Calendar 
Reminders of actions you need to take fall into two  categories: 
those about things that have to happen on a specifi c day or time, 
and those about things that just need to get done a s soon as possi- 
ble. Your calendar handles the first type of remind er. 
Three things go on your calendar: 
• time-specific actions; 
• day-specific actions; and 
• day-specific information. 
Time-Specific Actions This is a fancy name for appointments. 
Often the next action to be taken on a project is a ttending a meet- 
ing that has been set up to discuss it. Simply trac king that on the 
calendar is sufficient. 
Day-Specific Actions These are things that you need to do some- 
time on a certain day, but not necessarily at a specific time. Perhaps 
you told Mioko you would call her on Friday to chec k that the 
39 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE 
report you're sending her is OK. She won't have the  report until 
Thursday, and she's leaving the country on Saturday , so Friday is 
the time window for taking the action—but anytime F riday will 
be fine. That should be tracked on the calendar for  Friday but not 
tied to any particular time slot—it should just go on the day. 
It's 
useful to have a calendar on which you can note bot h time- 
specific and day-specific actions. 
Day-Specific Information The calendar is also the place to keep 
track of things you want to know about on specific days—not nec- 
essarily actions you'll have to take but rather information that may 
be useful on a certain date. This might include dir ections for 
appointments, activities that other people (family or staff) will be 
involved in then, or events of interest. It's also helpful to put 
short-term "tickler" information here, too, such as  a reminder to 
call someone after the day they return from a vacat ion. 
No More "Daily To-Do" Lists   Those three things are what go on 
the calendar, and nothing else! I know this is here sy to traditional 
time-management training, which has almost uni- 
versally taught that the "daily to-do list" is key.  But 
such lists don't work, for two reasons. 
First, constant new input and shifting tactical 
priorities reconfigure daily work so consistently t hat 
it's virtually impossible to nail down to-do items 
ahead of time. Having a working game plan as a ref-
erence point is always useful, but it must be able to be 
renegotiated at any moment. Trying to keep a list i n writing on 
the calendar, which must then be rewritten on anoth er day if 
items don't get done, is demoralizing and a waste o f time. The 
"Next Actions" lists I advocate will hold all of th ose action 
reminders, even the most time-sensitive ones. And t hey won't 
have to be rewritten daily. 
Second, if there's something on a daily to-do list that doesn't 
absolutely have to get done that day, it will dilute the emphasis o n 
40 Blessed are the 
flexible, for they 
shall not be bent 
out of shape. 
—
Michael 
CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF  MASTERING WORKFLOW 
the things that truly do. If I have to call Mioko on Friday because 
that's the only day I can reach her, but then I add  five other, less 
important or less time-sensitive calls to my to-do list, when the 
day gets crazy I may never call Mioko. My brain wil l have to take 
back the reminder that that's the one phone call I won't get 
another chance at. That's not utilizing the system appropriately. 
The way I look at it, the calendar should be sacred  territory. If you 
write something there, it must get done that day or  not at all. The 
only rewriting should be for changed appointments. 
The "Next Actions" List(s) 
So where do all your action reminders go? On "Next Actions" 
lists, which, along with the calendar, are at the h eart of daily 
action-management organization. 
Any longer-than-two-minute, nondelegatable action y ou 
have identified needs to be tracked somewhere. "Cal l Jim Smith 
re budget meeting," "Phone Rachel and Laura's moms about 
sleepaway camp," and "Draft ideas re the annual sal es conference" 
are all the kinds of action reminders that need to be kept in appro- 
priate lists, or buckets, to be assessed as options  for what we will 
do at any point in time. 
If you have only twenty or thirty of these, it may be fine to 
keep them all on one list labeled "Next Actions," w hich you'll 
review whenever you have any free time. For most of
us, however, the number is more likely to be fifty to 
150. In that case it makes sense to subdivide your 
"Next Actions" list into categories, such as "Calls " to 
make when you're at a phone or "Project Head Ques- 
tions" to be asked at your weekly briefing. 
Nonactionable Items 
You need well-organized, discrete systems to handle  the items 
that require no action as well as the ones that do.  No-action sys- 
tems fall into three categories: trash, incubation, and reference. 
41 Everything should 
be made as simple 
as possible, but not 
simpler. 
—Albert Einstein 
42 THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE 
Trash 
Trash should be self-evident. Throw away anything that ha s no 
potential future action or reference value. If you leave this stuff 
mixed in with other categories, it will seriously u ndermine the 
system. 
Incubation 
There are two other groups of things besides trash that require no 
immediate action, but this stuff you will want to keep. Here again, 
it's critical that you separate nonactionable from actionable items; 
otherwise you will tend to go numb to your piles, s tacks, and lists 
and not know where to start or what needs to be don e. 
Say you pick up something from a memo, or read an e -mail, 
that gives you an idea for a project you might want to do someday, 
but not now. You'll want to be reminded of it again  later so you 
can reassess the option of doing something about it  in the future. 
For example, a brochure arrives in the mail for the  upcoming sea- 
son of your local symphony. On a quick browse, you see that the 
program that really interests you is still four mon ths away—too 
distant for you to move on it yet (you're not sure what your travel 
schedule will be that far out), but if you are in town, you'd like to 
go. What should you do about that? 
There are two kinds of "incubate" systems that coul d work 
for this kind of thing: "Someday/Maybe" lists and a  "tickler" file. 
"Someday/Maybe" It can be useful and inspiring to maintain an 
ongoing list of things you might want to do at some  point but not 
now. This is the "parking lot" for projects that wo uld be impossi- 
ble to move on at present but that you don't want t o forget about 
entirely. You'd like to be reminded of the possibil ity at regular 
intervals. 
CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF  MASTERING WORKFLOW 
Typical Partial "Someday/Maybe" List 
Get a bass-fishing boat Create promotional videos of  staff
Learn Spanish Find Stafford Lyons 
Take a watercolor class Get a digital video camera *
Get a sideboard for the kitchen Northern Italy trip 
Build a lap pool Apprentice with my carpenter 
Get Kathryn a scooter Spotlight our artwork 
Take a balloon ride Build a koi pond 
Build a wine cellar Digitize old photos and videos 
Take a trip through Montana Have a neighborhood part y 
Learn Photoshop software capabilities Set up remote- server access at home 
Set up a not-for-profit foundation 
You'll probably have some subcategories in your mas ter 
"Someday/Maybe" list, such as 
• CDs I might want 
• Videos to rent 
• Books to read 
• Wine to taste 
• Weekend trips to take 
• Things to do with the kids 
• Seminars to take 
You must review this list periodically if you're go ing to get 
the most value from it. I suggest you include a sca n of the con- 
tents in your Weekly Review (see page 46). 
"Tickler" File The most elegant version of holding for review is 
the "tickler" file, sometimes also referred to as a  "suspended" or 
"follow-on" file. This is a system that allows you to almost literally 
mail something to yourself, for receipt on some des ignated day in 
the future. 
Your calendar can serve the same function. You migh t 
remind yourself on your calendar for March 15, for example, that 
43 
44 THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE 
your taxes are due in a month; or for September 12,  that Swan 
Lake will be presented by the Bolshoi at the Civic Audit orium in 
six weeks. 
For further details, refer to chapter 7. 
Reference Material 
Many things that come your way require no action bu t have 
intrinsic value as information. You will want to ke ep and be able 
to retrieve these as needed. They can be stored in paper-based or 
digital form. 
Paper-based material—anything from the menu for a l ocal 
take-out deli to the plans, drawings, and vendor in formation for a 
landscape project—is best stored in efficient physi cal-retrieval 
systems. These can range from pages in a loose-leaf  planner or 
notebook, for a list of favorite restaurants or the  phone numbers 
of the members of a school committee, to whole file  cabinets 
dedicated to the due-diligence paperwork for a corp orate merger. 
Electronic storage can include everything from netw orked 
database information to ad hoc reference and archiv e folders 
located in your communication software. 
The most important thing to remember here is that r efer- 
ence should be exactly that—information that can be  easily 
referred to when required. Reference systems genera lly take 
two forms: (1) topic- and area-specific storage, an d (2) general- 
reference files. The first types usually define the mselves in terms 
of how they are stored—for example, a file drawer d edicated to 
contracts, by date; a drawer containing only confid ential 
employee-compensation information; or a series of c abinets for 
closed legal cases that might need to be consulted during future 
trials. 
General-Reference Filing The second type of reference system is 
one that everyone needs close at hand for storing a d hoc informa- 
tion that doesn't belong in some predesignated cate gory. You need 
somewhere to keep the instruction manual for your c ell phone, 
CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF  MASTERING WORKFLOW 
the notes from the meeting about the Smith project,  and those 
few yen that you didn't get to change at the end of  your last trip to 
Tokyo (and that you'll use when you go back there).
The lack of a good general-reference file can be on e of the 
biggest bottlenecks in implementing an efficient pe rsonal action- 
management system. If filing isn't easy and fast (a nd even fun!), 
you'll tend to stack things instead of filing them.  If your reference 
material doesn't have a nice clean edge to it, the line between 
actionable and nonactionable items will blur, visua lly and psycho- 
logically, and your mind will go numb to the whole business. 
Establishing a good working system for this categor y of material 
is critical to ensuring stress-free productivity; w e will explore it in 
detail in chapter 7. 
Review 
It's one thing to write down that you need milk; it 's another to be 
at the store and remember it. Likewise, writing down that you 
need to call a friend for the name of an estate att orney is different 
from remembering it when you're at a phone and have  some dis- 
cretionary time. 
You need to be able to review the whole picture of your life 
and work at appropriate intervals and appropriate l evels. For most 
people the magic of workflow management is realized  in the con- 
sistent use of the review phase. This is where you take a look at 
all your outstanding projects and open loops, at wh at I call the 
10,000-foot level (see page 51), on a weekly basis.  It's your chance 
to scan all the defined actions and options before you, thus radi- 
cally increasing the efficacy of the choices you ma ke about what 
you're doing at any point in time. 
What to Review When 
If you set up a personal organization system struct ured as I rec- 
ommend, with a "Projects" list, a calendar, "Next A ctions" lists, 
45 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE 
and a "Waiting For" list, not much will be required  to maintain 
that system. 
The item you'll probably review most frequently is your 
calendar, which will remind you about the "hard lan dscape" for 
the day—that is, what things will die if you don't do them. This 
doesn't mean that the things written on there are t he most 
"important" in some grand sense—only that they have  to get 
done. At at any point in time, knowing what has to get done, and 
when, creates a terrain for maneuvering. It's a goo d habit, as soon 
as you conclude an action on your calendar (a meeti ng, a phone 
call, the final draft of a report), to check and se e what else remains 
to be done. 
After checking your calendar, you'll most often 
turn to your "Next Actions" lists. These hold the 
inventory of predefined actions that you can take i f 
you have any discretionary time during the day. If 
you've organized them by context ("At Home," "At 
Computer," "In Meeting with George"), they'll come 
into play only when those contexts are available. 
"Projects," "Waiting For," and "Someday/Maybe" list s need 
to be reviewed only as often as you think they have  to be in order 
to stop you from wondering about them. 
Critical Success Factor: The Weekly Review 
Everything that might potentially require action mu st be 
reviewed on a frequent enough basis to keep your mi nd from tak- 
ing back the job of remembering and reminding. In o rder to trust 
the rapid and intuitive judgment calls that you mak e about 
actions from moment to moment, you must consistentl y retrench 
at some more elevated level. In my experience (with  thousands of 
people), that translates into a behavior critical f or success: the 
Weekly Review. 
All of your open loops (i.e., projects), active pro ject plans, 
and "Next Actions," "Agendas," "Waiting For," and e ven "Someday/ 
Maybe" lists should be reviewed once a week. This a lso gives you 
46 Review your lists as 
often as you need 
to, to get them off 
your mind. 
CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF  MASTERING WORKFLOW 
an opportunity to ensure that your brain is clear a nd 
that all the loose strands of the past few days hav e 
been collected, processed, and organized. 
If you're like most people, you've found that 
things can get relatively out of control during the
course of a few days of operational intensity. That 's 
to be expected. You wouldn't want to distract yours elf 
from too much of the work at hand in an effort to 
stay totally "squeaky clean" all the time. But in o rder 
to afford the luxury of "getting on a roll" with co nfi- 
dence, you'll probably need to clean house once 
a week. 
The Weekly Review is the time to 
• Gather and process all your "stuff." 
• Review your system. 
• Update your lists. 
• Get clean, clear, current, and complete. The affairs of life 
embrace a 
multitude of 
interests, and he 
who reasons in any 
one of them, 
without consulting 
the rest, is a 
visionary unsuited 
to control the 
business of the 
world. 
—-James 
Fenim 
ore 
Cooper 
Most people don't have a really complete system, an d they get 
no real payoff from reviewing things for just that reason: their 
overview isn't total. They still have a vague sense  that something 
may be missing. That's why the rewards to be gained  from imple- 
menting this whole process are at least geometric: the 
more complete the system is, the more you'll trust it. 
And the more you trust it, the more complete you'll
be motivated to keep it. The Weekly Review is a mas- 
ter key to maintaining that standard. 
Most people feel best about their work the week 
before their vacation, but it's not because of the vaca- 
tion itself. What do you do the last week before yo u 
leave on a big trip? You clean up, close up, clarif y, and 
renegotiate all your agreements with yourself and 
others. I just suggest that you do this weekly inst ead 
of yearly. 
47 Most people feel
best about their 
work when they've 
cleaned up, closed 
up, clarified, and 
renegotiated all
their agreements 
with themselves 
and others. Do this 
weekly instead of
yearly.
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE 
Do 
The basic purpose of this workflow-management proce ss is to 
facilitate good choices about what you're doing at any 
point in time. At 10:33 A.M. Monday, deciding 
whether to call Sandy, finish the proposal, or proc ess 
your e-mails will always be an intuitive call, but with 
the proper preplanning you can feel much more con- 
fident about your choices. You can move from hope to 
trust in your actions, immediately increasing your 
speed and effectiveness. 
Three Models for Making Action Choices 
Let's assume for a moment that you're not resisting  any of your 
"stuff" out of insecurity or procrastination. There  will always be a 
large list of actions that you are not doing at any given moment. 
So how will you decide what to do and what not to do, and feel 
good about both? 
The answer is, by trusting your intuition. If you h ave col- 
lected, processed, organized, and reviewed all your current commit- 
ments, you can galvanize your intuitive judgment wi th some 
intelligent and practical thinking about 
your work 
and values. 
I have developed three models that will be help- 
ful for you to incorporate in your decision-making 
about what to do. They won't tell you answers—
whether you  call  Frederick,  e-mail your  son  at
school, or just go have an informal "how are you?" 
conversation with your secretary—but they will assi st 
you in framing your options more intelligently. And  that's some- 
thing that the simple time- and priority-management  panaceas 
can't do. Every decision to 
act is an intuitive 
one. The challenge 
is to migrate from 
hoping it's the right 
choice to trusting 
it's the right choice. 
You have more to 
do than you can 
possibly do. You 
just need to feel
good about your 
choices. 
CHAPTER 2  I  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF  MASTERING WORKFLOW 
1. The Four-Criteria Model for Choosing Actions in the Moment 
At 3:22 on Wednesday, how do you choose what to do?  There are 
four criteria you can apply, in this order: 
1 | Context 
2 | Time available 
3 | Energy available 
4 | Priority 
Context A few actions can be done anywhere (like drafting i deas 
about a project with pen and paper), but most requi re a specific 
location (at home, at your office) or having some p roductivity tool 
at hand, such as a phone or a computer. These are t he first factors 
that limit your choices about what you can do in the moment. 
Time Available When do you have to do something else} Hav- 
ing a meeting in five minutes would prevent doing m any actions 
that require more time. 
Energy Available How much energy do you have? Some actions 
you have to do require a reservoir of fresh, creati ve mental energy. 
Others need more physical horsepower. Some need ver y little of 
either. 
Priority Given your context, time, and energy available, wha t 
action will give you the highest payoff? You have a n hour, you're 
in your office with a phone and a computer, and you r energy is 7.3 
on a scale of 10. Should you call the client back, work on the pro- 
posal, process your voice-mails and e-mails, or che ck in with your 
spouse to see how his or her day is going? 
This is where you need to access your intution and begin to 
rely on your judgment call in the moment. To explor e that con- 
cept further, let's examine two more models for dec iding what's 
"most important" for you to be doing. 
49 
50 THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE 
2. The Threefold Model for Evaluating Daily Work 
When you're getting things done, or "working" in th e universal 
sense, there are three different kinds of activitie s you can be 
engaged in: 
• Doing predefined work 
• Doing work as it shows up 
• Defining your work 
Doing Predefined Work When you're doing predefined work, 
you're working off your "Next Actions" lists—comple ting tasks 
that you have previously determined need to be done , managing 
your workflow. You're making the calls you need to make, drafting 
ideas you want to brainstorm, or preparing a list o f things to talk 
to your attorney about. 
Doing Work as It Shows Up Often things come up ad hoc—
unsuspected, unforeseen—that you either have to or choose to 
respond to as they occur. For example, your partner  walks into 
your office and wants to have a conversation about the new prod- 
uct launch, so you talk to her instead of doing all  the other things 
you could be doing. Every day brings surprises—unpl anned-for 
things that just show up, and you'll need to expend  at least some 
time and energy on many of them. When you follow th ese leads, 
you're deciding by default that these things are mo re important 
than anything else you have to do. 
Defining Your Work Defining your work entails clearing up your 
in-basket, your e-mail, your voice-mail, and your m eeting notes 
and breaking down new projects into actionable step s. As you 
process your inputs, you'll no doubt be taking care  of some less- 
than-two-minute actions and tossing and filing nume rous things 
(another version of doing work as it shows up). A g ood portion of 
this activity will consist of identifying things th at need to get 
CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF  MASTERING WORKFLOW 
done sometime, but not right away. You'll be adding  to all of your 
lists as you go along. 
Once you have defined all your work, you can trust that your 
lists of things to do are complete. And your contex t, time, and 
energy available still allow you the option of more  than one thing 
to do. The final thing to consider is the nature of  your work, and 
its goals and standards. 
3. The Six-Level Model for Reviewing Your Own Work 
Priorities should drive your choices, but most mode ls for deter- 
mining them are not reliable tools for much of our real work 
activity. In order to know what your priorities are , you have to 
know what your work is. And there are at least six different per- 
spectives from which to define that. To use an aero space analogy, 
the conversation has a lot to do with the altitude.
• 50,000+ feet: Life 
• 40,000 feet: Three- to five-year vision 
• 30,000 feet: One- to two-year goals 
• 20,000 feet: Areas of responsibility 
• 10,000 feet: Current projects 
• Runway: Current actions 
Let's start from the bottom up: 
Runway: Current Actions This is the accumulated list of all the 
actions you need to take—all the phone calls you ha ve to make, 
the e-mails you have to respond to, the errands you 've got to run, 
and the agendas you want to communicate to your bos s and your 
spouse. You'd probably have three hundred to five h undred hours'
worth of these things to do if you stopped the worl d right now 
and got no more input from yourself or anyone else.
10,000 Feet: Current Projects Creating many of the actions that 
you currently have in front of you are the thirty t o one hundred 
51 
52 THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE 
projects on your plate. These are the relatively sh ort-term out- 
comes you want to achieve, such as setting up a hom e computer, 
organizing a sales conference, moving to a new head quarters, and 
getting a dentist. 
20,000 Feet: Areas of Responsibility You create or accept most of 
your projects because of your responsibilities, whi ch for most 
people can be defined in ten to fifteen categories.  These are the 
key areas within which you want to achieve results and maintain 
standards. Your job may entail at least implicit co mmitments 
for things like strategic planning, administrative support, staff 
development, market research, customer service, or asset manage- 
ment. And your personal life has an equal number of  such focus 
arenas: health, family, finances, home environment,  spirituality, 
recreation, etc. Listing and reviewing these respon sibilities gives a 
more comprehensive framework for evaluating your in ventory of 
projects. 
30,000 Feet: One- to Two-Year Goals What you want to be expe- 
riencing in the various areas of your life and work  one to two years 
from now will add another dimension to defining you r work. 
Often meeting the goals and objectives of your job will require a 
shift in emphasis of your job focus, with new areas  of responsi- 
bility emerging. At this horizon personally, too, t here probably are 
things you'd like to accomplish or have in place, w hich could add 
importance to certain aspects of your life and dimi nish others. 
40,000 Feet: Three- to Five-Year Vision Projecting three to five 
years into the future generates thinking about bigg er categories: 
organization strategies, environmental trends, care er and life- 
transition circumstances. Internal factors include longer-term 
career, family, and financial goals and considerati ons. Outer- 
world issues could involve changes affecting your j ob and organi- 
zation, such as technology, globalization, market t rends, and 
CHAPTER 2  |  GETTING CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE: THE FIVE STAGES OF  MASTERING WORKFLOW 
competition. Decisions at this altitude could easil y change what 
your work might look like on many levels. 
50, 000+ Feet Life This is the "big picture" view. Why does your 
company exist? Why do you exist? The primary purpose for any- 
thing provides the core definition of what its "wor k" really is. It is 
the ultimate job description. All the goals, vision s, objectives, 
projects, and actions derive from this, and lead to ward it. 
These altitude analogies are somewhat arbitrary, an d in real 
life the important conversations you will have abou t your focus 
and your priorities may not fit exactly to one hori zon or another. 
They can provide a useful framework, however, to re mind you of 
the multilayered nature of your "job" and resulting  commitments 
and tasks. 
Obviously, many factors must be considered before y ou feel 
comfortable that you have made the best decision ab out what to 
do and when. "Setting priorities" in the traditiona l sense of focus- 
ing on your long-term goals and values, though obvi ously a neces- 
sary core focus, does not provide a practical frame work for a vast 
majority of the decisions and tasks you must engage  in day to day. 
Mastering the flow of your work at all the levels y ou experience 
that work provides a much more holistic way to get things done, 
and feel good about it. 
Part 2 of this book will provide specific coaching about how 
to use these three models for making action choices , and how the 
best practices for collecting, processing, planning , organizing, and 
reviewing all contribute to your greatest success w ith them. 
53