The Power of Outcome Focusing 
THE POWER OF directing our mental and imaginative p rocesses to 
create change has been studied and promoted in thou sands of 
contexts—from the early "positive thinking" books t o recent dis- 
coveries in advanced neurophysiology. 
My own interest has been in applying of the princip le in 
terms of practical reality: Does it help get things  done? And if so, 
how do we best utilize it in managing the work of o ur lives? Can 
we really use this information in ways that allow u s to produce 
what we want to have happen with less effort? The a nswer has 
been a resounding yes. 
Focus and the Fast Track 
Over the years I have seen the application of the m ethod pre- 
sented in this book create profound results for peo ple in their day- 
to-day worlds. As you begin to use it habitually as  your primary 
means of addressing all situations—from processing e-mails, to 
buying a house or a company, to structuring meeting s or having 
conversations with your kids—your personal producti vity can go 
through the roof. 
Many of the professionals I have worked with who in te- 
grated this method now find themselves experiencing  enhanced 
or even new jobs and careers. These processes reall y work in the 
arena of the ordinary things we must deal with dail y—the stuff 
of 
249 
250 THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  |  PART THREE 
our work. When you demonstrate to yourself and to o thers an 
increasing ability to get things done "in the trenc hes," you proba- 
bly won't stay in the same trench for very long.* I t's been inspiring 
for me to learn and coach others how to deal with t he immediate 
realities down where the rubber hits the road—and h ow to tie in 
the power of positive imagery to practical experien ces in all our 
daily lives. 
The "fast track" alluded to in the section heading above is a 
bit of misnomer. For some, slowing down, getting ou t of the squir- 
rel cage, and taking care of themselves may be the major change 
precipitated by this methodology. The bottom line i s it makes you 
more conscious, more focused, and more capable of i mplementing 
the changes and results you want, whatever they are . 
"Create a way to regularly spend more time with my daugh- 
ter" is as specific a project as any, and equally d emanding of a next 
action to be determined. Having the vague, gnawing sense that 
you "should" do something about your relationship w ith your 
daughter, and not actually doing anything, can be a  killer. I often 
work with clients who are willing to acknowledge th e real things 
of their lives at this level as "incompletes"—to wr ite them down, 
define real projects about them, and ensure that ne xt actions are 
decided on—until the finish line is crossed. That i s real productiv- 
ity, perhaps in its most awesome manifestation. 
The Significance of Applied Outcome Thinking 
What I want to emphasize now is how learning to pro cess the 
details of our work and lives with this clear and c onsistent system 
*Of course, the people who are most attracted to implementing Getting Things 
Done are usually already on a self-development track and  don't assume that 
they'll be doing the same thing a year from now tha t they're doing now, any- 
way. But they love the fact that this method gets th em there faster and more 
easily. 
CHAPTER 13 I THE POWER OF OUTCOME FOCUSING 
can affect others and ourselves in significant ways  we may not 
expect. 
As I've said, employing next-action decision- 
making results in clarity, productivity, accountabi lity, 
and empowerment. Exactly the same results happen 
when you hold yourself to the discipline of identif y- 
ing the real results you want and, more specificall y, 
the projects you need to define in order to produce
them. 
It's all connected. You can't really define the 
right action until you know the outcome, and your o utcome is dis- 
connected from reality if you're not clear about wh at you need to 
do physically to make it happen. You can get at it from either 
direction, and you must, to get things done. 
As an expert in whole-brain learning and good frien d of 
mine, Steven Snyder, put it, "There are only two pr oblems in life: 
(1) you know what you want, and you don't know how to get it; 
and/or (2) you don't know what you want." If that's  true (and I 
think it is) then there are only two solutions: 
• Make it up. 
• Make it happen. 
This can be construed from the models of 
yin/yang, right brain/left brain, creator/destroyer —
or whatever equivalent works best for you. The 
truth is, our energy as human beings seems to have a 
dualistic and teleological reality—we create and id entify with 
things that aren't real yet on all the levels we ex perience; and 
when we do, we recognize how to restructure our cur rent world 
to morph it into the new one, and experience an imp etus to make 
it so. 
Things that have your attention need your in tention 
engaged. "What does this mean to me?" "Why is it he re?" "What 
do I want to have be true about this?" ("What's the  successful 
251 Defining specific 
projects and next
actions that address 
real quality-of- 
life issues is 
productivity at
its best.
We are constantly 
creating and 
fulfilling.
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  I  PART THREE 
outcome?") Everything you experience as incomplete 
must have a reference point for "complete." 
Once you've decide that there is something 
to be changed and a mold to fill, you ask yourself,
"How do I now make this happen?" and/or "What 
resources do I need to allocate to make it happen?"
("What's the next action?"). 
Your life and work are made up of outcomes and 
actions. When your operational behavior is grooved 
to organize everything that comes your way, at all 
levels, based upon those dynamics, a deep align- 
ment occurs, and wondrous things emerge. You be- 
come highly productive. You make things up, and you  make them 
happen. 
252 The Magic of Mastering the Mundane 
My clients often wonder how I can sit with them in their offices, 
often for hours on end, as they empty the drawers o f their desks 
and painstakingly go through the minutiae of stuff that they have 
let accumulate in their minds and their physical sp ace. Aside from 
the common embarrassment they feel about the volume  of their 
irresponsibly dealt-with details, they assume I sho uld be bored to 
tears. Quite the contrary. Much to my own surprise,  I find it to be 
some of the most engaging work I do with -people. I  know the 
release and relief and freedom that sit on the othe r side of dealing 
with these things. I know that we all need practice  and support 
and a strong, clear focus to get through them, unti l we have the 
built-in standards and behaviors we need to engage with them as 
they demand. I know how significant a change these people may 
experience in their relationships with their bosses , their partners, 
their spouses, their kids, and themselves over the next few hours 
and (we hope) days and years. 
It's not boring. It's some of the best work we do. Life affords no 
higher pleasure 
than that of 
surmounting 
difficulties, passing 
from one step of 
success to another, 
forming new 
wishes and seeing 
them gratified. 
—Dr. 
Samuel 
CHAPTER 13  I THE POWER OF OUTCOME FOCUSING 
I'm in the focus business. As a consultant and coac h, 
I ask simple questions that often elicit very creat ive 
and intelligent responses from others (and even 
myself!), which can in turn add value to the situat ion 
and work at hand. People aren't any smarter after 
they work with me than they were before—they just 
direct and utilize their intelligence more producti vely. 
What's unique about the practical focus of Getting Things 
Done is the combination of effectiveness and efficiency that these 
methods can bring to every level of your reality. T here are lots of 
inspirational sources for the high-level "purpose, values, vision" 
kind of thinking, and many more mundane tools for g etting hold 
of smaller details such as phone numbers and appoin tments and 
grocery lists. The world has been rather barren, ho wever, of prac- 
tices that relate equally to both levels, and tie t hem together. 
"What does this mean to me?" "What do I want 
to have be true about it?" "What's the next step 
required to make that happen?" These are the corner - 
stone questions we must answer, at some point, abou t 
everything. This thinking, and the tools that suppo rt 
it, will serve you in ways you may not yet imagine.
The Power of Natural Planning 
The value of all this natural project planning is t hat it 
provides an integrated, flexible, aligned way to th ink 
through any situation. 
Being comfortable with challenging the pur- 
pose of anything you may be doing is healthy and ma ture. Being 
able to "make up" visions and images of success, be fore the meth- 
ods are clear, is a phenomenal trait to strengthen.  Being willing to 
253 Multilevel Outcome Management The 
challenge is to marry high-level
idealistic focus to 
the mundane 
activity of life. In the 
end they require the 
same thinking.
An idealist believes 
that the short run 
doesn't count. A 
cynic believes the 
long run doesn't 
matter. A realist 
believes that what 
is done or left 
undone in the short 
run determines the 
long run. 
—Sidney]. 
254 THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  I  PART THREE 
have ideas, good or bad, and to express and capture  all of them 
without judgments is critical for fully accessing c reative intelli- 
gence. Honing multiple ideas and types of informati on into com- 
ponents, sequences, and priorities aimed toward a s pecific 
outcome is a necessary mental discipline. And decid ing on and 
taking real next actions—actually moving on somethi ng in the 
physical world—are the essence of productivity. 
Being able to bring all these ingredients together,  with 
appropriate timing and balance, is perhaps the majo r component 
of professional competence for this new millennium.  But it's not 
yet the norm in professional behavior; far from it.  It's still a daunt- 
ing task to apply this awareness to all the aspects  of personal and 
professional life. But even when only portions of t he model are 
inserted, tremendous benefit ensues. 
The feedback I have gotten over the years in my con sulting, 
teaching, and coaching with this model has continue d to validate 
that even the slightest increase in the use of natu ral planning can 
bring significant improvement. To see brainstorming  about 
almost every aspect of their lives becoming a stand ard tool for 
many people is terrific. To hear from executives wh o have used the 
model as a way to frame key meetings and discussion s, and have 
gotten great value from doing that, is gratifying. It all just affirms 
that the way our minds naturally work is the way th at we should 
focus to make anything happen in the physical world . 
The model is simply the basic principle of determin ing out- 
comes and actions for everything we consider to be our work. 
When those two key focus points become the norm in our day- 
to-day lives, the baseline for productivity moves t o another level. 
The addition of brainstorming—the most creative mea ns of 
expressing and capturing ideas, perspectives, and d etails about 
projects—makes for an elegant set of behaviors for staying relaxed 
and getting things done. 
CHAPTER 13  | THE POWER OF OUTCOME FOCUSING 
Shifting to a Positive Organizational Culture 
It doesn't take a big change to increase the produc tivity standards 
of a group. I continually get feedback indicating t hat with a little 
implementation, this method immediately makes thing s happen 
more quickly and more easily. 
The constructive evaluation of activities, asset al locations, 
communications, policies, and procedures against pu rposes and 
intended outcomes has become increasingly critical for every 
organization I know of. The challenges to our compa nies con- 
tinue to mount, with pressures coming these days fr om globali- 
zation, competition, technology, shifting markets, and raised 
standards of performance and production. 
"What do we want to have happen in this meeting?" " What 
is the purpose of this form?" "What would the ideal  person for 
this job be able to do?" "What do we want to accomp lish with this 
software?" These and a multitude of other, similar questions are 
still sorely lacking in many quarters. There's plen ty of talk in the 
Big Meetings that sounds good, but learning to ask "Why are we 
doing this?" and "What will it look like when it's done success- 
fully?" and to apply the answers at the day-to-day operational 
level—that is what will create profound results. 
Empowerment naturally ensues for individuals as the y move 
from complaining and victim modalities into outcome s and 
actions defined for direction. When that becomes th e standard in a 
group, it creates significant improvement in the at mosphere as well 
as the output. There are enough other problems to b e concerned 
with; negativity and passive resistance need to con tinually give way 
to a focus on the desired results at the appropriat e horizons. 
The microcosm of how people deal with their in-bask ets, 
e-mail, and conversations with others will be refle cted in the 
macro-reality of their culture and organization. If  balls are 
dropped, if decisions about what to do are resisted  on the front 
end, if not all the open loops are managed responsi bly, that will be 
255 
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  I  PART THREE 
A vision without 
a task is but a 
dream, a task 
without a vision is 
drudgery, a vision 
and a task is the 
hope of the world. 
—From a church 
in 
Sussex, England, 
ca.1730 magnified in the group, and the culture will sustai n a 
stressful fire-and-crisis siege mentality. If, in c on- 
trast, individuals are implementing the principles of 
Getting Things Done, the culture will expect and 
experience a new standard of high performance. 
Problems and conflicts will not go away—they 
remain inherent as you attempt to change (or main- 
tain) anything in this world. The operational behav - 
iors of this book, however, will provide the focus and 
framework for addressing them in the most produc- 
tive way. 
256