The Power of the 
Next-Action Decision 
I HAVE A personal mission to make "What's the next action?" part of 
the global thought process. I envision a world in w hich no meet- 
ing or discussion will end, and no interaction ceas e, without a 
clear determination of whether or not some action i s needed—
and if it is, what it will be, or at least who has responsibility for it. 
I envision organizations adopting a standard that a nything that 
lands in anyone's "ten acres" will be evaluated for  action required, 
and the resulting decisions managed appropriately. Imagine the 
freedom that would allow to focus attention on bigg er issues and 
opportunities. 
Over the years I have noticed an extraordinary 
shift in energy and productivity whenever individu-
als and groups installed "What's the next action?" as 
a fundamental and consistently asked question. As 
simple as the query seems, it is still somewhat rar e to 
find it fully operational where it needs to be. 
One   of  the   greatest   challenges   you   may 
encounter is that once you have gotten used to 
"What's the next action?" for yourself and those 
around you, interacting with people who aren't ask-
ing it can be highly frustrating. It clarifies thin gs so 
quickly that dealing with people and environments t hat don't use 
it can seem nightmarish. 
We are all accountable to define what, if anything,  we are 
committed to make happen as we engage with ourselve s and 
236 When a culture 
adopts "What's the 
next action?" as a 
standard operating 
query, there's an 
automatic increase 
in energy, 
productivity, clarity, 
and focus. 
CHAPTER 12  |  THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION 
others. And at some point, for any outcome that we have an inter- 
nal commitment to complete, we must make the decisi on about 
the next physical action required. There's a great difference, how- 
ever, between making that decision when things show  up and 
doing it when they blow up. 
The Source of the Technique 
I learned this simple but extraordinary next-action  technique 
twenty years ago from a longtime friend and managem ent- 
consulting mentor of mine, Dean Acheson (no relatio n to the 
former secretary of state). Dean had spent many pri or years con- 
sulting with executives and researching what was re quired to free 
the psychic logjams of many of them about projects and situations 
they were involved in. One day he just started pick ing up each 
individual piece of paper on an executive's desk an d forcing him to 
decide what the very next thing was that he had to do to move it 
forward. The results were so immediate and so profo und for the 
executive that Dean continued for years to perfect a methodology 
using that same question to process the in-basket. Since then 
both of us have trained and coached thousands of pe ople with this 
key concept, and it remains a foolproof technique. It never fails to 
greatly improve both the productivity and the peace  of mind of 
the user to determine what the next physical action  is that will 
move something forward. 
Creating the Option of Doing 
How could something so simple be so powerful—"What' s the 
next action?" 
To help answer that question, I invite you to revis it for a 
moment your mind-sweep list (see page 113). Or at l east to think 
about all the projects that are probably sitting ar ound in your 
237 
238 THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I  PART THREE 
psyche. Do you have a sense that they haven't been moving along 
as consistently and productively as they could be? You'll probably 
admit that yes, indeed, a few have been a little bi t "stuck." 
If you haven't known for sure whether you needed to  make a 
call, send an e-mail, look up something, or buy an item at the 
store as the very next thing to move on, it hasn't been getting 
done. What's ironic is that it would likely require  only about ten 
seconds of thinking to figure out what the next act ion would be 
for almost everything on your list. But it's ten se conds of thinking 
that most people haven't done about most things on their list. 
For example, a client will have something like "tir es" on a 
list. 
I then ask, "What's that about?" 
He responds, "Well, I need new tires on my car." 
"So what's the next action?" 
At that point the client usually wrinkles up his fo rehead, 
ponders for a few moments, and expresses his conclu sion: "Well, I 
need to call a tire store and get some prices." 
That's about how much time is required to decide wh at the 
"doing" would look like on almost everything. It's just the few sec- 
onds of focused thinking that most people have not yet done 
about most of their stuff. 
It will probably be true, too, that the person who needs tires 
on his car has had that on his radar for quite a wh ile. It's also likely 
that he's been at a phone hundreds of times, often with enough 
time and/or energy only to make just such a call. W hy didn't he 
make it? Because in that state of mind, the last th ing in the world 
he felt like doing was considering all his projects , including get- 
ting tires, and what their next actions were. In th ose moments he 
didn't feel like thinking at all. 
What he needed was to have already figured those th ings 
out. If he gets that next-action thinking done, the n, when he hap- 
pens to have fifteen minutes before a meeting, with  a phone at 
hand, and his energy at about 4.2 out of 10, he can  look at the list 
of options of things to do and be delighted to see "Call tire store 
CHAPTER 12  | THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION 
for prices" on it. "That's something I can do and c om- 
plete successfully!" he'll think, and then he'll ac tually be 
motivated to make the call, just to experience the "win" 
of completing something useful in the time and ener gy 
window he's in. In this context he'd be incapable o f 
starting a large proposal draft for a client, but h e has 
sufficient resources for punching phone numbers and
getting simple information quickly. It's highly pro bable 
that at some point soon he'll look at the new set o f tires 
on his car and feel on top of the world. 
Defining what real doing looks like, on the most 
basic level, and organizing placeholder reminders 
that we can trust, are master keys to productivity 
enhancement. 
These are learnable techniques, and ones that we ca n con- 
tinue to get better at. 
Often even the simplest things are stuck because we  haven't 
made a final decision yet about the next action. Pe ople in my 
seminars often have things on their lists like "Get  a tune-up for 
the car." Is "Get a tune-up" a next action? Not unl ess you're walk- 
ing out with wrench in hand, dressed for grease. 
"So, what's the next action?" 
"Uh, I need to take the car to the garage. Oh, yeah , I need to 
find out if the garage can take it. I guess I need to call the garage 
and make the appointment." 
"Do you have the number?" 
"Darn, no ... I don't have the number for the garag e. Fred 
recommended that garage to me, and I don't have 
the number. I knew something was missing in the 
equation." 
And that's often what happens with so many 
things for so many people. We glance at the project , 
and some part of us thinks, "I don't quite have all  the 
pieces between here and there." We know something i s 
missing, but we're not sure what it is exactly, so we quit. 
239 The secret of 
getting ahead is 
getting started. 
The secret of 
getting started is 
breaking your 
complex 
overwhelm ing 
tasks into small 
manageable tasks, 
and then starting 
on the first one. 
—Mark Twain 
Without a next
action, there 
remains a 
potentially infinite 
gap between current
reality and what you 
need to do.
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  |  PART THREE 
"So, what's the next action?" 
"I need to get the number. I guess I could get it f rom Fred." 
"Do you have Fred's number?" 
"I have Fred's number!" 
So the next action really is "Call Fred for the num ber of the 
garage." 
Did you notice how many steps had to be tracked bac k 
before we actually got to the real next action on t his project? 
That's typical. Most people have many things just l ike that on 
their lists. 
Why Bright People Procrastinate the Most 
It's really the smartest people who have the highes t number of 
undecided things in their lives and on their lists.  Why is that? 
Think of how our bodies respond to the images we ho ld in our 
minds. It appears that the nervous system can't tel l the difference 
between a well-imagined thought and reality. 
To prove this to yourself, picture yourself walking  into a 
supermarket and going over to the brightly lit frui t-and-vegetable 
section. Are you there? OK, now go to the citrus bi ns—oranges, 
grapefruits, lemons. Now see the big pile of yellow  lemons. 
There's a cutting board and a knife next to them. T ake one of 
those big yellow lemons and cut it in half. Smell t hat citrus smell! 
It's really juicy, and there's lemon juice tricklin g onto 
the board. Now take a half lemon and cut that in half, 
so you have a quarter lemon wedge in your hands. 
OK, now—remember how you did this as a kid?—
put that quarter of a lemon in your mouth and bite 
into it! Scrunch! 
If you played along with me, you probably 
noticed that  the  saliva  content  in your  mouth 
increased at least a bit. Your body was actually tr ying to process 
citric acid! And it was just in your mind. 
240 Bright people have 
the capability of 
freaking out faster 
and more 
dramatically than 
anyone else. 
CHAPTER 12  I THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION 
If your body responds to the pictures you give it, how are you 
likely to feel physically when you think about, say , doing your 
taxes? Are you sending yourself "easy," "let's go,"  completion, suc- 
cess, and "I'm a winner!" pictures? Probably not. F or just that rea- 
son, what kinds of people would logically be the mo st resistant to 
being reminded about a project like that—that is, w ho would pro- 
crastinate the most? Of course, it would be the mos t creative, 
sensitive, and intelligent people! Because their se nsi- 
tivity gives them the capability of producing in th eir 
minds lurid nightmare scenarios about what might 
be involved in doing the project, and all the negat ive 
consequences that might occur if it weren't done pe r- 
fectly! They just freak out in an instant and quit!
Who doesn't procrastinate? Often it's the insen- 
sitive oafs who just take something and start plod-
ding forward, unaware of all the things that could go 
wrong. Everyone else tends to get hung up about all
kinds of things. 
Do my taxes? Oh, no! It's not going to be that easy . It's going 
to be different this year, I'm sure. I saw the form s—they look dif- 
ferent. There are probably new rules I'm going to h ave to figure 
out. I might have to read all that damn material. L ong form, short 
form, medium form? File together, file separate? We 'll probably 
want to claim deductions, but if we do we'll have t o back them up, 
and that means we'll need all the receipts. Oh, my God—I don't 
know if we really have all the receipts we'd need a nd what if we 
didn't have all the receipts but we claimed the ded uctions anyway 
and we got audited? Audited? Oh, no—the IRS—JAIL!! 
And so a lot of people put themselves in jail, just  glancing at 
their 1040 tax forms. Because they're so smart, sen sitive, and cre- 
ative. In my many years of coaching individuals, th is pattern has 
been borne out more times than I can count—usually it's the 
brightest and most sophisticated folks who have the  most stuck 
piles, in their offices, homes, and heads. Most of the executives I 
work with have at least several big, complex, and a morphous 
241 I am an old man 
and have known a 
great many 
troubles, but most 
of them never 
happened. 
—Mark 
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  I  PART THREE 
projects stacked either on a credenza or on a menta l shelf. There 
always seem to be hobgoblin thoughts lurking inside  them—
"If 
we don't look at or think about the projects, maybe
they'll stay quiet!" 
So what's the solution? There's always having a 
drink. Numb it out. Dumb it down. Notice what 
happens to many people when they get a little alco-
hol on the brain. It should drop their energy imme-
diately, because it's a depressant; often, though, the energy lifts, at 
least initially. Why? The alcohol is depressing something—it's 
shutting down the negative self-talk and uncomforta ble visions 
that are going on in these folks' minds. Of course my energy will 
increase if I stop depressing myself with overwhelm ing pictures of 
not handling something successfully. But the numb-o ut solutions 
are temporary at best. The "stuff" doesn't go away.  And unfortu- 
nately, when we numb ourselves out, we can't do it selectively—
the source of inspiration and enthusiasm and person al energy also 
seems to get numbed. 
Intelligent Dumbing Down 
There is another solution: intelligently dumbing do wn your brain 
by figuring out the next action. You'll invariably feel a relieving of 
pressure about anything you have a commitment to ch ange or do, 
when you decide on the very next physical action re quired to 
move it forward. Nothing, essentially, will change in 
the world. But shifting your focus to something tha t 
your mind perceives as a doable, completeable task 
will create a real increase in positive energy, dir ection, 
and motivation. If you truly captured all the thing s 
that have your attention during the mind-sweep, go 
through the list again now and decide on the single
very next action to take on every one of them. Noti ce 
what happens to your energy. 
You are either attracted or repelled by the things 
on your lists; there isn't any neutral territory. Y ou are 
242 Ceasing negative 
imaging will always 
cause your energy 
to increase. 
No matter how big 
and tough a 
problem may be, 
get rid of confusion 
by taking one little 
step toward 
solution. Do 
something. 
—George 
F. 
CHAPTER 12  I  THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION 
either positively drawn toward completing the actio n or reluctant 
to think about what it is and resistant to getting involved in it. 
Often it's simply the next-action decision that mak es the differ- 
ence between the two extremes. 
In following up with people who have taken my 
seminars or been coached by my colleagues or me, 
I've discovered that one of the subtler ways many o f 
them fall off the wagon is in letting their action lists 
grow back into lists of tasks or subprojects instea d of 
discrete next actions. They're still ahead of most peo- 
ple because they're actually writing things down, b ut 
they often find themselves stuck, and procrastinat-
ing, because they've allowed their action lists to har- 
bor items like: 
"Meeting with the banquet committee" 
"Johnny's birthday" 
"Receptionist" 
"Slide presentation" 
In other words, things have morphed back into "stuf f-ness 
instead of staying at the action level. There are n o clear next 
actions here, and anyone keeping a list filled with  items like this 
would send his or her brain into overload every tim e he/she 
looked at it. 
Is this extra work? Is figuring out the next 
action on your commitments additional effort to 
expend that you don't need to? No, of course not. I f 
you need to get your car tuned, for instance, you'r e 
going to have to figure out that next action at som e 
point anyway. The problem is that most people wait to do it until 
the next action is "Call the Auto Club for tow truc k!!" 
So when do you think most people really make a lot of their 
next-action decisions about their stuff-—when it sh ows up, or 
when it blows up? And do you think there might be a  difference 
243 Everything on your 
lists and in your 
stacks is either 
attractive or 
repulsive to you—
there's no neutral
ground when it
comes to your stuff.
You can only cure 
retail but you can 
prevent wholesale. 
—Brock Chisolm 
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I  PART THREE 
in the quality of their lives if they handled this knowledge work 
on the front end instead of the back? Which do you think is the 
more efficient way to move through life—deciding 
next actions on your projects as soon as they appea r 
on your radar screen and then efficiently grouping 
them into categories of actions that you get done i n 
certain uniform contexts, or avoiding thinking abou t 
what exactly needs to be done until it has to be done, 
then nickel-and-diming your activities as you try t o 
catch up and put out the fires? 
That may sound exaggerated, but when I ask groups o f peo- 
ple to estimate when most of the action decisions a re made in 
their companies, with few exceptions they say, "Whe n things 
blow up." One global corporate client surveyed its population 
about sources of stress in its culture, and the num ber one com- 
plaint was the last-minute crisis work consistently  promoted by 
team leaders who failed to make appropriate decisio ns on the 
front end. 
244 The Value of a Next-Action 
Decision-Making Standard 
I have had several sophisticated senior executives tell me that 
installing "What's the next action?" as an operatio nal standard in 
their organizations was transformative in terms of measurable 
performance output. It changed their culture perman ently and 
significantly for the better. 
Why? Because the question forces clarity, accountab ility, 
productivity, and empowerment. 
Clarity 
Too many discussions end with only a vague sense th at people 
know what they have decided and are going to do. Bu t without 
a clear conclusion that there is a next action, much less what it is Avoiding action 
decisions until the 
pressure of the last 
minute creates huge 
inefficiencies and 
unnecessary stress. 
CHAPTER 12  | THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION 
or who's got it, more often than not a lot of "stuf f" gets left up in 
the air. 
I am frequently asked to facilitate meetings. I've learned the 
hard way that no matter where we are in the convers ation, twenty 
minutes before the agreed end-time of the discussio n I must force 
the question: "So what's the next action here?" In my experience, 
there is usually twenty minutes' worth of clarifyin g (and some- 
times tough decisions) still required to come up wi th an answer. 
This is radical common sense—radical because it oft en 
com- 
pels discussion at deeper levels than people are co mfortable with. 
"Are we serious about this?" "Do we really know wha t we're doing 
here?" "Are we really ready to allocate precious ti me and resources 
to this?" It's very easy to avoid these more releva nt levels of think- 
ing. What prevents those issues from slipping away into amor- 
phous "stuff" is forcing the decision about the nex t action. Some 
further conversation, exploration, deliberation, an d negotiation 
are often needed to put the topic to rest. The worl d is too unpre- 
dictable these days to permit assumptions about out - 
comes: we need to take responsibility for moving 
things to clarity. 
You have to have some experience of this to 
really know what I mean here. If you do, you're 
probably saying to yourself, "Yes!" If you're not s ure 
what I'm talking about, I suggest that in your next  meeting with 
anyone, you end the conversation with the question,  "So what's 
the next action here?" Then notice what happens. 
Accountability 
The dark side of "collaborative cultures" is the al lergy they foster 
to holding anyone responsible for having the ball. "Mine or 
yours?" is unfortunately not in the common vocabula ry of many 
such organizations. There is a sense that that woul d be impolite. 
"We're all in this together" is a worthy sentiment,  but seldom a 
reality in the hard-nosed day-to-day world of work.  Too many meet- 
ings end with a vague feeling among the players tha t something 
245 Talk does not cook 
rice. 
—Chinese 
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  I  PART THREE 
ought to happen, and the hope that it's not their p ersonal job to 
make it so. 
The way I see it, what's truly impolite is allowing people to
walk away from discussions unclear. Real "togethern ess" of a 
group is reflected by the responsibility that all t ake for defining 
the real things to do and the specific people assig ned to do them, 
so everyone is freed of the angst of still-undecide d actions. 
Again, if you've been there, you'll know what I'm t alking 
about. If you haven't, test it out—take a small ris k and ask "So 
what's the next action on this?" at the end of each  discussion point 
in your next staff meeting, or in your next "family  conversation" 
around the dinner table. 
Productivity 
Organizations naturally become more productive when  they 
model and train front-end next-action decision-maki ng. For all 
the reasons mentioned above, determining the requir ed physical 
allocation of resources necessary to make something
happen as soon as the outcome has been clarified wi ll 
produce more results sooner, and with less effort. 
Learning to break through the barriers of the 
sophisticated   creative   thinking   that   can   freeze 
activity—that is, the entangled psychic webs we 
spin—is a superior skill. "Productivity" has been 
touted for decades as a desirable thing to improve in 
organizations. Anything that can help maximize 
output will do that. But in the world of knowledge 
work, all the computers and telecom improvements 
and leadership seminars on the planet will make no 
difference in this regard unless the individuals in volved increase 
their operational responsiveness. And that requires  thinking 
about something that lands in your world before you have to. 
One of the biggest productivity leaks I have seen i n some 
organizations is the lack of next actions determine d for "long- 
term" projects. "Long-term" does not mean "Someday/ Maybe." 
246 There are risks and 
costs to a program 
of action, but they 
are far less than 
the long-range '
risks and costs of 
comfortable 
inaction. 
—John 
F. 
CHAPTER 12  I  THE POWER OF THE NEXT-ACTION DECISION 
Those projects with distant goal lines are still to  be 
done as soon as possible; "long-term" simply means,
"more action steps until it's done," not "no need t o 
decide next actions because the day of reckoning is  so 
far away." When every project and open loop in an 
organization is being monitored, it's a whole new b all 
game. 
Empowerment 
Perhaps the greatest benefit of adopting the next- 
action approach is that it dramatically increases y our 
ability to make things happen, with a concomitant r ise in your 
self-esteem and constructive outlook. 
People are constantly doing things, but usually onl y when 
they have to, under fire from themselves or others.  They get no 
sense of winning, or of being in control, or of coo perating among 
themselves and with their world. People are starvin g for those 
experiences. 
The daily behaviors that define the things that are  incom- 
plete and the moves that are needed to complete the m must 
change. Getting things going of your own accord, be fore you're 
forced to by external pressure and internal stress,  builds a firm 
foundation of self-worth that will spread into ever y aspect of your 
life. You are the captain of your own ship; the mor e you act from 
that perspective, the better things will go for you . 
Asking "What's the next action?" undermines the vic tim 
mentality. It presupposes that there is a possibili ty of change, and 
that there is something you can do to make it happe n. That is the 
assumed affirmation in the behavior. And these kind s of "assumed 
affirmations" often work more fundamentally to buil d a positive 
self-image than can repeating "I am a powerful, eff ective person, 
making things happen in my life!" a thousand times.
Is there too much complaining in your culture? The next 
time someone moans about something, try asking, "So  what's the 
next action?" People will complain only about somet hing that 
247 Productivity will
improve only when 
individuals increase 
their operational
responsiveness.
And in knowledge 
work, that means 
clarifying actions on 
the front end 
instead of the back.
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES |  PART THREE 
they assume could be better than it currently is. T he action ques- 
tion forces the issue. If it can be changed, there' s some action that 
will change it. If it can't, it must be considered part of 
the landscape to be incorporated in strategy and ta c- 
tics. Complaining is a sign that someone isn't will ing 
to risk moving on a changeable situation, or won't 
consider the immutable circumstance in his or her 
plans. This is a temporary and hollow form of self-
validation. 
Although my colleagues and I rarely promote 
our work in this way, I notice people really empowe r- 
ing themselves every day as we coach them in apply-
ing the next-action technique. The light in their e yes 
and the lightness in their step increase, and a pos itive 
spark shows up in their thinking and demeanor. We 
are all already powerful, but deciding on and effec - 
tively managing the physical actions required to 
move things forward seems to exercise that power in
ways that call forward the more positive aspects of
our nature. 
When you start to make things happen, you really be gin to 
believe that you can make things happen. And that makes things 
happen. 
248 People are always 
blaming their 
circumstances for 
what they are. I 
don't believe in 
circumstances. The 
people who get on 
in this world are 
the people who get 
up and look for the 
circumstances they 
want, and, if they 
can't find them, 
- make them. 
—George Bernard 
Shaw