Getting Projects Under Control 
CHAPTERS 4 THROUGH 9 have given you all the tricks and methods you 
need to clear your head and make intuitive choices about what to 
do when. That's the horizontal level—what needs you r attention 
and action across the horizontal landscape of your life. The last 
piece of the puzzle is the vertical level—the diggi ng deep and pie- 
in-the-sky thinking that can leverage your creative  brainpower. 
That gets us back to refining and energizing our pr oject planning. 
The Need for More Informal Planning 
After years of working with thousands of profession als down in 
the trenches, I can safely say that virtually all o f us could be doing 
more planning, more informally and more often, abou t our proj- 
ects and our lives. And if we did, it would relieve  a lot of pressure 
on our psyches and produce an enormous amount of cr eative out- 
put with minimal effort. 
I've discovered that the biggest improvement opport unity in 
planning does not consist of techniques for the hig hly elaborate 
and complex kinds of project organizing that profes sional project 
managers sometimes use (like GANTT charts). Most of  the peo- 
ple who need those already have them, or at least h ave access to 
the training and software required to learn about t hem. The real 
need is to capture and utilize more of the creative , proactive 
thinking we do—or could do. 
211 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
The major reason for the lack of this kind of effec tive value- 
added thinking is the dearth of systems for managin g the poten- 
tially infinite amount of detail that could show up
as a result. This is why my approach tends to be 
bottom-up. If you feel out of control with your cur - 
rent actionable commitments, you'll resist focused 
planning. An unconscious pushback occurs. As you 
begin to apply these methods, however, you may find
that they free up enormous creative and constructiv e 
thinking. If you have systems and habits ready to 
leverage your ideas, your productivity can expand e xponentially. 
In chapter 3, I covered in some detail the five pha ses of proj- 
ect planning that take something from the idea stag e into physical 
reality. 
What follows is a compilation of practical tips 
and techniques to facilitate the natural, informal 
planning processes I recommend. Although these 
suggestions are all based on common sense, they're 
not followed nearly as frequently as they could be.
Put them to use whenever and as often as you can, 
instead of saving up your thinking for big formal 
meetings. 
212 Which Projects Should You Be Planning? 
Most of the outcomes you have identified for your " Projects" list 
will not need any kind of front-end planning, other  than the sort 
you do in your head, quickly and naturally, to come  up with a next 
action on them. The only planning needed for "Get c ar 
inspected," for example, would be to decide to chec k the phone 
book for the nearest inspection location and call a nd set up a time. 
There are two types of projects, however, that dese rve at least 
some sort of planning activity: (1) those that stil l have your atten- 
tion even after you've determined their next action s, and (2) those The middle of 
every successful 
project looks like a 
disaster. 
—Rosabeth 
Moss 
You need to set up 
systems and tricks 
that get you to think 
about your projects 
and situations more 
frequently, more 
easily, and in more 
depth. 
CHAPTER 10  |  GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROL 
about which potentially useful ideas and supportive  detail just 
show up. 
The first type—the projects that you know have othe r things 
about them that must be decided on and organized—wi ll need a 
more detailed approach than just identifying a next  action. For 
these you'll need a more specific application of on e or more of the 
other four phases of the natural planning model: pu rpose and 
principles, vision/outcome, brainstorming, and/or o rganizing. 
The second type—the projects for which ideas just s how up, 
ad hoc, on a beach or in a car or in a meeting—need  to have an 
appropriate place into which these associated ideas  can be cap- 
tured. Then they can reside there for later use as needed. 
Projects That Need Next Actions About Planning 
There are probably a few projects you can think of right now, off 
the top of your head, that you know you want to get  more objecti- 
fied, fleshed out, and under control. Perhaps you h ave an impor- 
tant meeting coming up and you know you have to pre pare an 
agenda and materials for it. Or you've just inherit ed the job of 
coordinating the annual associates' conference, and  you've got to 
get it organized as soon as possible so you can sta rt delegating sig- 
nificant pieces. Or you've got to clarify a job des cription for a new 
position on your team to give to Human Resources. I f you haven't 
done it already, get a next action now that will start the planning 
process for each of these, and put it on the approp riate action list. 
Then proceed with further planning steps. 
Typical Planning Steps 
The most common types of planning-oriented actions will be 
your own brainstorming and organizing, setting up m eetings, and 
gathering information. 
Brainstorming Some of the projects that have your attention 
right now will require you to do your own free-form  thinking; this 
is especially true of those for which you were not clear about what 
213 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO 
the next action would be when you made that decisio n. These 
should all have a next action, such as "Draft ideas  re X." 
You need to decide where and how you want to do tha t 
action, in order to know which action list to put i t on. Do you do 
this kind of thinking best on a computer, or by han d-writing your 
thoughts on paper? I may choose either medium, depe nding on 
what my intuition tells me. For me this next action  would go 
either on my "At Computer" list or on "Anywhere" (b ecause I can 
draw mind-maps wherever I am, as long as I have pen  and paper). 
Organizing You may have some projects for which you have 
already collected notes and miscellaneous support m aterials, and 
you just need to sort through them and get them int o a more struc- 
tured form. In this case, your next action would li kely be "Organize 
Project X notes." If you have to be in your office to do that 
(because that's where the files are, and you don't want to carry 
them around), that action should go on your "At Off ice" action list. 
If you're carrying the project notes around with yo u in a folder, or 
in a portable organizer or on a laptop, then the "O rganize ..." 
action would go on an "Anywhere" or "Misc." action list if you're 
going to do it by hand, or on "At Computer" if you' re going to use a 
word processor, outliner, or project-planning softw are. 
One of the greatest 
blocks to organi- 
zational productivity 
is the lack of 
decision by a senior 
person about the 
necessity of a meet- 
ing, and with whom, 
to move an im- 
portant issue 
forward. Setting Up Meetings Often, progress will be made 
on project thinking when you set up a meeting with 
the people you'd like to have involved in the brain - 
storming. That usually means sending an e-mail to 
the whole group or to an assistant to get it calen-
dared, or making a phone call to the first person t o 
nail down a time. 
Gathering Information Sometimes the next task on 
project thinking is to gather more data. Maybe you 
need to talk to someone to get his or her input ("C all 
Bill re his thoughts on the managers' meeting"). Or
214 
CHAPTER 10  |  GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROL 
you need to look through the files you just inherit ed from last 
year's conference ("Review Associate Conference arc hive files"). 
Or you want to surf the Web to get a sense of what' s happening 
"out there" on a new topic you're exploring ("R&D s earch firms 
for sales executives"). 
Random Project Thinking 
Don't lose any ideas about projects that could pote ntially be use- 
ful. Many times you'll think of something you don't  want to forget 
when you're a place that has nothing to do with the  project. You're 
driving to the store, for example, and you think of  a great way that 
you might want to start off the next staff meeting.  Or you're stir- 
ring the spaghetti sauce in the kitchen and it occu rs to you that 
you might want to give out nice tote bags to partic ipants in the 
upcoming conference. Or you're watching the evening  news when 
you suddenly remember another key person you might want to 
include in the advisory council you're putting toge ther. 
If these aren't specifically next actions that can go directly on 
your action lists, you'll still need to capture and  organize them 
somewhere that makes sense. Of course the most crit ical tools for 
ensuring that nothing gets lost is your collection system—your 
in-basket, pad, and paper (or equivalents) at work and at home, 
and in a portable version (an index card) while you 're out and 
about. You need to hold all your ideas until you la ter decide what 
to do with them. 
Tools and Structures That Support 
Project Thinking 
No matter at what level project ideas show up, it's  great to have 
good tools always close at hand for capturing them as they occur. 
Once they've been captured, it's useful to have acc ess to them 
whenever you need to refer to them. 
215 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWO 
Thinking Tools 
One of the great secrets to getting ideas and incre asing your pro- 
ductivity is utilizing the function-follows-form ph enomenon—
great tools can trigger good thinking. (I've come u p 
with some of my most productive thoughts when 
playing with my Palm organizer in an airport, wait-
ing for a flight!) 
If you aren't writing anything down, it's 
extremely difficult to stay focused on anything for
more than a few minutes, especially if you're by yo ur- 
self. But when you utilize physical tools to keep y our 
thinking anchored, you can stay engaged construc- 
tively for hours. 
Writing Instruments 
Keep good writing tools around all the time so you never have any 
unconscious resistance to thinking due to not havin g 
anything to capture it with. If I don't have some- 
thing to write with, I can sense that I'm not as co m- 
fortable letting myself think about projects and 
situations. 
Conversely, I have done some great thinking 
and planning at times just because I wanted to use 
my nice-looking, smooth-writing ballpoint pen! You 
may not be inspired by cool gear like I am, but if you 
are, do yourself a favor and invest in quality writ ing 
tools. 
I also suggest that you keep nice ballpoint pens at  the sta- 
tions where you're likely to want to take notes—par ticularly near 
the phones around your house. 
216 Luck affects 
everything. Let 
your hook always 
be cast; in the 
stream where you 
least expect it there 
will be a fish. 
—
Function often 
follows form. Give 
yourself a context 
for capturing 
thoughts, and 
thoughts will occur 
that you don't yet 
know you have. 
CHAPTER 10  |  GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROL 
Paper and Pads 
In addition to writing tools, you should always hav e functional 
pads of paper close at hand. Legal pads work well b ecause you can 
easily tear off pages with ideas and notes and toss
them into your in-basket until you get a chance to 
process them. Also you will often want to keep some
of your informal mind-maps, and you can put those 
separate pieces of paper in appropriate file folder s 
without having to rewrite them. 
Easels and Whiteboards 
If you have room for them, whiteboards and/or easel  pads are very 
functional thinking tools to use from time to time.  They give you 
plenty of space on which to jot down ideas, and it can be useful to 
keep them up in front of you for while, as you incu - 
bate on a topic. Whiteboards are great to have on a
wall in your office and in meeting rooms, and the 
bigger the better. If you have children, I recommen d 
that you install one in their bedrooms (I wish I'd 
grown up with the encouragement to have as many 
ideas as I could!). Be sure to keep plenty of fresh  markers on hand; 
it's frustrating to want to start writing on a whit eboard and find 
that all the markers are dry and useless. 
Whenever two or more people are gathered for a meet ing, 
someone should start writing somewhere where the ot her(s) can 
see. Even if you erase your thoughts after a few mi nutes, just the 
act of writing them down facilitates a constructive  thinking 
process like nothing else. (I've found it immensely  helpful at times 
to draw informal diagrams and notes on paper tablec loths, place 
mats, or even napkins in restaurants, if I didn't h ave my own pad 
of paper at hand.) 
217 Where is your 
closest pad? Keep it
closer.
How do I know 
what I think, until 
I hear what I say? 
—E. M. Forster 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWO 
The Computer 
Many times I like to think on my laptop, in my word  processor. 
There are so many things I might want to do later o n with my 
thinking, and it feels terrific to already have it in some digital 
form for later editing and cutting and pasting into
various other applications. Once I've booted up and
the screen is ready in front of me, I find that thi nking 
just automatically starts to happen. This is anothe r 
good reason to ensure that your typing and keyboard
skills are sufficient to make engaging with the com puter at least 
easy, if not downright fun. 
The Support Structures 
In addition to good tools ubiquitously at hand, it is productive to 
have accessible formats into which project thinking  can be cap- 
tured. Much as a pen and paper in front of you supp orts brain- 
storming, having good tools and places for organizi ng project 
details facilitates the more linear planning that m any projects 
need. 
Create File Folders or Loose-Leaf Pages as Needed 
A good general-reference filing system, right at ha nd and easy to 
use, is not only critical to manage the general wor kflow process, 
but highly functional for project thinking as well.  Often a project 
begins to emerge when it's triggered by relevant da ta, notes, and 
miscellaneous materials, and for this reason, you'l l want to create 
a folder for a topic as soon as you have something to put in it. If 
your filing system is too formal (or nonexistent), you'll probably 
miss many opportunities to generate a project focus  sufficiently 
early. As soon as you return from that first meetin g with your ini- 
tial notes about a topic that has just emerged on t he horizon, cre- 
ate a file and store them in it right away (after y ou have gleaned 
any next actions, of course). 
Many times, in coaching clients, I find that the me re act of 
218 Leverage your 
computer as a think 
station. 
CHAPTER 10  |  GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROL 
creating a file for a topic into which we can organ ize random 
notes and potentially relevant materials gives them  a significantly 
improved sense of control. It's a way of physically , visibly, and psy- 
chologically getting their "arms around it." 
If you like to work with a loose-leaf notebook or 
planner, it's good to keep an inventory of fresh no te 
paper or graph paper that you can use to set up a p age 
on a theme or project as it shows up. While some 
projects may later deserve a whole tabbed section o r 
even an entire notebook of their own, they don't st art 
out that way. And most of your projects may need 
only a page or two to hold the few ideas you need t o 
track. 
Software Tools 
Software is in one sense a dark black hole to explo re in search of 
good "project management" tools. For the most part,  the applica- 
tions that are specifically designed for project or ganizing are way 
too complex, with too much horsepower to really be functional for 
98 percent of what most people need to manage. They 're appro- 
priate only for the very small percentage of the pr ofessional world 
that actually needs them. The rest of us usually fi nd bits and 
pieces of applications more informal and project-fr iendly. As I've 
noted, I have never seen any two projects that need ed the same 
amount of detailing and structure to get them under  control. So it 
would be difficult to create any one application th at would suffice 
for the majority. 
Digital Outlining Most of what anyone needs to structure his 
or her thinking about projects can be found in any kind of ap- 
plication that has a simple hierarchical outlining function. I 
used to use a Symantec program called Grandview, an d now I 
often use Microsoft Word for just this kind of proj ect planning. 
Here's a piece of an outline I created for one of o ur own planning 
sessions: 
219 If you don't have a 
good system for 
filing bad ideas, you 
probably don't have 
one for filing good 
ones, either.
220 
The great thing about outlining applications is tha t they can 
be as complex or as simple as required. There are n umerous soft- 
ware programs that provide this kind of basic hiera rchical struc- 
turing. The trick is to find one that you feel comf ortable with, so 
you can rapidly get familiar with how to insert hea dings and sub- 
headings and move them around as needed. Until you can stop 
focusing on how to use the program, you'll resist b ooting it up and 
using it to think and organize. 
It doesn't really matter where you put this kind of  thinking, 
so long as it's easily accessible so you can input and review it as 
needed. 
Brainstorming Applications Several applications have been 
developed specifically to facilitate the brainstorm ing process. 
"Inspiration" was one, based on the mind-mapping te chniques of PRACTICIN 
CHAPTER 10  I  GETTING PROJECTS UNDER CONTROL 
Tony Buzan. It had some useful features, but me, I' ve gone back 
to paper and cool pen for the kind of rapid, inform al thinking I 
usually need to do. 
The problem with digitizing brainstorming is that f or the 
most part we don't need to save what we brainstorm in the way we 
brainstormed it—the critical thing is the conclusio ns we 
develop 
from that raw thinking. The slick brainstorming-cap ture tools, 
like electronic whiteboards and digital handwriting -copying gear, 
ultimately will probably not be as successful as th e manufacturers 
hoped. We don't need to save creative thinking so m uch as we do 
the structures we generate from it. There are signi ficant differ- 
ences among collecting and processing and organizin g, and dif- 
ferent tools are usually required for them. You mig ht as well dump 
ideas into a word processor. 
Project-Planning Applications As I've mentioned, most project- 
planning software is too rigorous for the majority of the project 
thinking and planning we need to do. Over the years  I've seen 
these programs more often tried and discontinued th an utilized as 
a consistent tool. When they're used successfully, they're usually 
highly customized to fit very specific requirements  for the com- 
pany or the industry. 
I anticipate that less structured and more function al appli- 
cations will emerge in the coming years, based on t he ways we 
naturally think and plan. Until then, best stick wi th some good 
and simple outliner. 
Attaching Digital Notes 
If you are using a digital organizer, much of the p roject planning 
you need to capture outside your head can in fact b e satisfactorily 
managed in an attached note field. If you have the project itself as 
an item on a list on a Palm, or as a task in Micros oft Outlook, you 
can open the accompanying "Note" section and jot id eas, bullet 
points, and subcomponents of the project. Just ensu re that you 
review the attachment appropriately to make it usef ul. 
221 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
How Do I Apply All This in My World? 
Just as your "Next Actions" lists need to be up-to- date, so, 
too, does your "Projects" list. That done, give you rself a block of 
time, ideally between one and three hours, to handl e 
as much of the "vertical" thinking about each proje ct 
as you can. 
At the very least, right now or as soon as possi- 
ble, take those few of your projects that you have the 
most attention on or interest in right now and do 
some thinking and collecting and organizing on 
them, using whatever tools seem most appropriate. 
Focus on each one, one at a time, top to bottom. 
As you do, ask yourself, "What about this do I want  to know, cap- 
ture, or remember?" 
You may just want to mind-map some thoughts on a pi ece of 
paper, make a file, and toss the paper into it. You  may come up 
with some simple bullet-point headings to attach as  a 
"note" in your software organizer. Or you could cre - 
ate a Word file and start an outline on it. 
The key is to get comfortable with having and 
using your ideas. And to acquire the habit of focus ing 
your energy constructively, on intended outcomes 
and open loops, before you have to. 
222 Clear the deck, 
create a context, 
and do some 
creative project 
thinking. You'll then 
be way ahead of 
most people. 
Let our advance 
worrying become 
advance thinking 
and planning. 
—
Winston