Welcome to Getting Things Done 
WELCOME TO A gold mine of insights into strategies for how to have 
more energy, be more relaxed, and get a lot more ac complished 
with much less effort. If you're like me, you like getting things 
done and doing them well, and yet you also want to savor life in 
ways that seem increasingly elusive if not downrigh t impossible if 
you're working too hard. This doesn't have to be an  either-or 
proposition. It is possible to be effectively doing while you are 
delightfully being, in your ordinary workaday world. 
I think efficiency is a good thing. Maybe what you' re doing is 
important, interesting, or useful; or maybe it isn' t but it has to be 
done anyway. In the first case you want to get as m uch return as 
you can on your investment of time and energy. In 
the second, you want to get on to other things as f ast 
as you can, without any nagging loose ends. 
And whatever you're doing, you'd probably like to 
be more relaxed, confident that whatever you're doi ng 
at the moment is just what you need to be doing—tha t 
having a beer with your staff after hours, gazing a t your 
sleeping child in his or her crib at midnight, answ ering 
the e-mail in front of you, or spending a few infor mal 
minutes with the potential new client after the mee ting 
is exactly what you ought to be doing, as you're doing it. 
Teaching you how to be maximally efficient and 
relaxed, whenever you need or want to be, was my ma in purpose 
in writing this book. 
xi The art of resting 
the mind and the 
power of 
dismissing from it 
all care and worry 
is probably one of 
the secrets of our 
great men. 
—Captain]. 
A. 
xiiWELCOME TO GETTING THINGS DONE 
I have searched for a long time, as you may have, f or answers 
to the questions of what to do, when to do it, and how to do it. 
And after twenty-plus years of developing and apply ing new 
methods for personal and organizational productivit y, alongside 
years of rigorous exploration in the self-developme nt arena, I can 
attest that there is no single, once-and-for-all so lution. No soft- 
ware, seminar, cool personal planner, or personal m ission state- 
ment will simplify your workday or make your choice s for you as 
you move through your day, week, and life. What's m ore, just 
when you learn how to enhance your productivity and  decision- 
making at one level, you'll graduate to the next ac cepted batch of 
responsibilities and creative goals, whose new chal lenges will defy 
the ability of any simple formula or buzzword-du-jo ur to get you 
what you want, the way you want to get it. 
But if there's no single means of perfecting person al organi- 
zation and productivity, there are things we can do to facilitate 
them. As I have personally matured, from year to ye ar, I've found 
deeper and more meaningful, more significant things  to focus on 
and be aware of and do. And I've uncovered simple p rocesses that 
we can all learn to use that will vastly improve ou r ability to deal 
proactively and constructively with the mundane rea lities of the 
world. 
What follows is a compilation of more than two deca des'
worth of discoveries about personal productivity—a guide to 
maximizing output and minimizing input, and to doin g so in a 
world in which work is increasingly voluminous and ambiguous. I 
have spent many thousands of hours coaching people "in the 
trenches" at their desks, helping them process and organize all of 
their work at hand. The methods I have uncovered ha ve proved to 
be highly effective in all types of organizations, at every job level, 
across cultures, and even at home and school. After  twenty years 
of coaching and training some of the world's most s ophisticated 
and productive professionals, I know the world is h ungry for these 
methods. 
Executives at the top are looking to instill "ruthl ess execu- 
WELCOME TO GETTING THINGS DONE 
tion" in themselves and their people as a basic sta ndard. They 
know, and I know, that behind closed doors, after h ours, there 
remain unanswered calls, tasks to be delegated, unp rocessed issues 
from meetings and conversations, personal responsib ilities 
unmanaged, and dozens of e-mails still not dealt wi th. Many of 
these businesspeople are successful because the cri ses they solve 
and the opportunities they take advantage of are bi gger than the 
problems they allow and create in their own offices  and briefcases. 
But given the pace of business and life today, the equation is in 
question. 
On the one hand, we need proven tools that can help  people 
focus their energies strategically and tactically w ithout letting 
anything fall through the cracks. On the other, we need to create 
work environments and skills that will keep the mos t invested 
people from burning out due to stress. We need posi tive work- 
style standards that will attract and retain the be st and brightest. 
We know this information is sorely needed in organi zations. 
It's also needed in schools, where our kids are sti ll not being 
taught how to process information, how to focus on outcomes, or 
what actions to take to make them happen. And for a ll of us indi- 
vidually, it's needed so we can take advantage of a ll the opportuni- 
ties we're given to add value to our world in a sus tainable, 
self-nurturing way. 
The power, simplicity, and effectiveness of what I' m talking about 
in Getting Things Done are best experienced as experiences, in real 
time, with real situations in your real world. Nece ssarily, the book 
must put the essence of this dynamic art of workflo w manage- 
ment and personal productivity into a linear format . I've tried 
to organize it in such a way as to give you both th e inspiring big- 
picture view and a taste of immediate results as yo u go along. 
The book is divided into three parts. Part 1 descri bes the 
whole game, providing a brief overview of the syste m and an 
explanation of why it's unique and timely, and then  presenting the 
basic methodologies themselves in their most conden sed and 
xiii 
xiv WELCOME TO GETTING THINGS DONE 
basic form. Part 2 shows you how to implement the s ystem. 
It's your personal coaching, step by step, on the n itty-gritty appli- 
cation of the models. Part 3 goes even deeper, desc ribing the 
subtler and more profound results you can expect wh en you incor- 
porate the methodologies and models into your work and your 
life. 
I want you to hop in. I want you to test this stuff  out, even 
challenge it. I want you to find out for yourself t hat what I prom- 
ise is not only possible but instantly accessible t o you personally. 
And I want you to know that everything I propose is  easy to do. It 
involves no new skills at all. You already know how  to focus, how 
to write things down, how to decide on outcomes and  actions, and 
how to review options and make choices. You'll vali date that 
many of the things you've been doing instinctively and intuitively 
all along are right. I'll give you ways to leverage those basic skills 
into new plateaus of effectiveness. I want to inspi re you to put all 
this into a new behavior set that will blow your mi nd. 
Throughout the book I refer to my coaching and semi nars 
on this material. I've worked as a "management cons ultant" for 
the last two decades, alone and in small partnershi ps. My work 
has consisted primarily of doing private productivi ty coaching 
and conducting seminars based on the methods presen ted here. I 
(and my colleagues) have coached more than a thousa nd indi- 
viduals, trained hundreds of thousands of professio nals, and deliv- 
ered many hundreds of public seminars; This is the background 
from which I have drawn my experience and examples.
The promise here was well described by a client of mine who 
wrote, "When I habitually applied the tenets of thi s program it 
saved my life . . . when I faithfully applied them, it changed my life. 
This is a vaccination against day-to-day fire-fight ing (the so- 
called urgent and crisis demands of any given workd ay) and an 
antidote for the imbalance many people bring upon t hemselves."