Conclusion 
I HOPE THIS book has been useful—that you have star ted to reap the 
rewards of getting more done with less effort and s tress. And I 
really hope you have tasted the freedom of a "mind like wa ter" and 
the release of your creative energies that can come  with the appli- 
cation of these techniques. Those who begin to impl ement these 
methods always discover there's more here than meet s the eye, 
and you may have begun to experience your own versi on of that. 
I'll bet Getting Things Done has validated much of what you 
already know and have been doing to some degree all  along. Per- 
haps, though, it will make it much easier for you t o apply that 
common sense more systematically in a world that se ems to 
increasingly confound us with its intensity and com plexity. 
My intent is not to add more to the plethora of mod ern 
theories and models about how to be successful. I h ave tried, 
on the contrary, to define the core methods that do n't change with 
the times, and which, when applied, always work. Li ke gravity, 
when you understand the principle, you can operate a lot more 
effectively, no matter what you're doing. Perhaps t his is the Lead- 
ing Edge of Back to Basics! 
Getting Things Done is a road map to achieve the positive, 
relaxed focus that characterizes your most producti ve state. I 
invite you to use it, like a road map, as a referen ce tool to get back 
there whenever you need to. 
To consistently stay on course, you'll have to do s ome things 
257 
258 CONCLUSION 
that may not be habits yet: keep everything out of your head; 
decide actions and outcomes when things first emerg e on your 
radar, instead of later; and regularly review and u pdate the com- 
plete inventory of open loops of your life and work . I hope by now 
you at least have established a reference point for  the value these 
behaviors create. Don't be surprised, though, if it  takes a little 
while to make them automatic. Be patient, and enjoy  the process. 
Here are some final tips for moving forward: 
• Get your personal physical organization hardware se t up. Get 
your workstation organized. Get in-baskets. Create a personal 
filing system—for work and home. Get a good list- 
management organizer that you are inspired to play with. I also 
suggest that you give yourself permission to make a ny changes 
that you have been contemplating for enhancing your  work 
environments. Hang pictures, buy pens, toss stuff, rearrange 
your work space. Support your fresh start. 
• Set aside some time when you can tackle one whole a rea of 
your office, and then each part of your house. Gath er 
everything into your system, and work through the Getting 
Things Done process. 
• Share anything of value you've gleaned from this wi th someone 
else. (It's the fastest way to learn.) 
• Review Getting Things Done again in three to six months. 
You'll notice things you might have missed the firs t time 
through, and I guarantee it will seem like a whole new book. 
• Stay in touch with people who are broadcasting and reflecting 
these behaviors and standards. (We're available. Vi sit 
http://www.davidco.com anytime for tons of free sup port 
material, conversations about these best practices,  current 
CONCLUSION 
information about supportive products and services,  and access 
to our global network of people sharing the best pr actices in 
productivity. For anything, contact us at The David  Allen 
Company at info@davidco.com or 805-646-8432.) 
Have a great rest of your life! 
259