Processing: Getting "In" to Empty 
ASSUMING THAT YOU have collected everything that ha s your atten- 
tion, your job now is to actually get to the bottom  of "in." Getting 
"in" to empty doesn't mean actually doing all the actions and 
projects that you've collected. It just means ident ifying each item 
and deciding what it is, what it means, and what yo u're going to 
do with it. 
When you've finished processing "in," you will have
1 | trashed what you don't need; 
2 | completed any less-than-two-minute actions; 
3 | handed off to others anything that can be delegate d; 
4 | sorted into your own organizing system reminders o f 
actions that require more than two minutes; and 
5 |   identified any larger commitments (projects) y ou now have, 
based on the input. 
To get an overview of this process, you may find it  useful 
here to refer to the Workflow Diagram on page 120. The center 
column illustrates all the steps involved in proces sing and decid- 
ing your next actions. 
This chapter focuses on the components in the diagr am's 
center column, the steps from "in" to next action. You'll immedi- 
ately see the natural organization that results fro m following this 
process for each of your open loops. For instance, if you pick up 
something from "in" and realize, "I've got to call Andrea about 
119 
120 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWO 
WORKFLOW DIAGRAM—PROCESSING 

CHAPTER 6  I  PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTY 
that, but I've got to do it on Monday, when she's i n her office," 
then you'll defer that action immediately and enter  it into your 
calendar for Monday. 
I recommend that you read through this chapter and the 
next one, on organizing your actions, before you ac tually start 
processing what you've collected in "in." It may sa ve you some 
steps. When I coach clients through this process, i t invariably 
becomes a dance back and forth between the simple d ecision- 
making stage of processing the open loops and the trickier task of 
figuring out the best way to enter these decisions in a client's par- 
ticular organization system. 
Many of my coaching clients, for example, are eager  to 
get set up personally on a PDA organizer that will synchro- 
nize with Microsoft Outlook, which their company is  using for 
e-mail and scheduling. The first thing we have to d o (after 
we've collected the in-basket) is make sure all the ir hardware 
and software are working. Then we clean up (print o ut and 
erase, usually) everything they have previously tri ed to organize 
in their Outlook task lists and put it all into "in ." Then we estab- 
lish some working categories such as "Calls," "Erra nds," "Agen- 
das," "At Computer," and so on. As we begin to proc ess the 
in-basket, the client can go immediately to his com puter and 
type his action steps directly into the system he w ill ultimately 
depend on. 
If you're not sure yet what you're going to be usin g as a per- 
sonal reminder system, don't worry. You can begin v ery appropri- 
ately with the low-tech initial process of notes on  pieces of paper. 
You can always upgrade your tools later, once you h ave your sys- 
tem in place. 
Processing Guidelines 
The best way to learn this model is by doing. But t here are a few 
basic rules to follow: 
121 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWO 
• Process the top item first. 
• Process one item at a time. 
• Never put anything back into "in." 
Top Item First 
Even if the second item down is a personal note to you from the 
president of your country, and the top item is a pi ece of junk mail, 
you've got to process the junk mail first! That's a n 
exaggeration to make a point, but the principle is an 
important one: everything gets processed equally. 
The verb "process" does not mean "spend time on." I t 
just means "decide what the thing is and what actio n 
is required, and then dispatch it accordingly." You 're going to get 
to the bottom of the basket as soon as you can anyw ay, and you 
don't want to avoid dealing with anything in there. 
Emergency Scanning Is Not Processing 
Most people get to their in-basket or their e-mail and look for the 
most urgent, most fun, or most interesting stuff to  deal with first. 
"Emergency scanning" is fine and necessary sometime s (I do 
it, too). Maybe you've just come back from an off-s ite meeting 
and have to be on a long conference call in fifteen  minutes. So 
you check to make sure there are no land mines abou t to explode 
and to see if your client has e-mailed you back OK' ing the big 
proposal. 
But that's not processing your in-basket; it's emer gency 
scanning. When you're in processing mode, you must get into the 
habit of starting at one end and just cranking thro ugh items one 
at a time, in order. As soon as you break that rule , and process only 
what you feel like processing, and in whatever order, you'll inva ri- 
ably begin to leave things unprocessed. Then you wi ll no longer 
have a functioning funnel, and it will back up all over your desk 
and office. 
122 Process does 
not mean "spend 
time on." 
CHAPTER 6  |  PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTY 
LIFOorFIFO? 
Theoretically, you should flip your in-basket upsid e down and 
process first the first thing that came in. As long  as you go from 
one end clear through to the other within a reasona ble period of 
time, though, it won't make much difference. You're
going to see it all in short order anyway. And if y ou're 
going to attempt to clear up a big backlog of e-mai ls 
staged in "in," you'll actually discover it's more effi- 
cient to process the last-in first because of all t he dis- 
cussion  threads  that  accumulate  on  top  of one
another. 
One Item at a Time 
You may find you have a tendency, while processing your in- 
basket, to pick something up, not know exactly what  you want to 
do about it, and then let your eyes wander onto ano ther item far- 
ther down the stack and get engaged with it. That item may be 
more attractive to your psyche because you know right away what 
to do with it —and you don't feel like thinking about what's in 
your hand. This is dangerous territory. What's in y our hand is 
likely to land on a "hmppphhh" stack on the side of  your desk 
because you become distracted by something easier, more impor- 
tant, or more interesting below it. 
Most people also want to take a whole stack of thin gs out of 
the in-basket at once, put it right in front of the m, and try to 
crank through it. Although I empathize with the des ire to "deal 
with a big chunk," I constantly remind clients to p ut back every- 
thing but the one item on top. The focus on just on e thing forces 
the requisite attention and decision-making to get through all 
your stuff. And if you get interrupted (which is li kely), you won't 
have umpteen parts of "in" scattered around outside  the tray and 
out of control again. 
123 The in-basket is a 
processing station,
not a storage bin.
124 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
The Multitasking Exception 
There's a subtle exception to the one-item-at-a-tim e rule. Some 
personality types really need to shift their focus away from some- 
thing for at least a minute in order to make a deci sion about it. 
When I see this going on with someone, I let him ta ke two or 
sometimes three things out at once as he's processi ng. It's then 
easier and faster for him to make a choice about th e action 
required. 
Remember, multitasking is an exception—and it works
only 
if you hold to the discipline of working through ev ery item in 
short order, and never avoid any decision for longer than a minute 
or two. 
Nothing Goes Back into "In" 
There's a one-way path out of "in." This is actuall y what was 
meant by the old admonition to "handle things once, " though 
handling things just once is in fact a bad idea. If  you did that, 
you'd never have a list, because you would finish e verything as 
soon as you saw it. You'd also be highly ineffectiv e and inefficient, 
since most things you deal with are not to be acted upon the first 
time you become aware of them. Where the advice doe s hold is in 
eliminating the bad habit of continually picking th ings up out of 
"in," not deciding what they mean or what you're go ing to do 
about them, and then just leaving them there. A bet ter admoni- 
tion would be, "The first time you pick something u p from your 
in-basket, decide what to do about it and where it goes. Never put 
it back in "in." 
The Key Processing Question: 
"What's the Next Action?" 
You've got the message. You're going to deal with o ne item at a 
time. And you're going to make a firm next-action d ecision about 
CHAPTER 6  |  PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTY 
each one. This may sound easy—and it is—but 
it 
requires you to do some fast, hard thinking. Much o f 
the time the action will not be self-evident; it wi ll 
need to be determined. 
On that first item, for example, do you need to 
call someone? Fill something out? Get information 
from the Web? Buy something at the store? Talk to 
your secretary? E-mail your boss? What? If there's an 
action, its specific nature will determine the next  set 
of options. But what if you say, "There's really no th- 
ing to do with this"? I am rather like a 
mosquito in a 
nudist camp; I 
know what I want 
to do, but I don't 
know where to 
begin. 
—Stephen Bayne 
What If There Is No Action? 
It's likely that a portion of your in-basket will r equire no action. 
There will be three types of things in this categor y: 
• Trash 
• Items to incubate 
• Reference material 
Trash 
If you've been following my suggestions, you'll no doubt already 
have tossed out a big pile of stuff. It's also like ly that you will have 
put stacks of material into "in" that include thing s you don't need 
anymore. So don't be surprised if there's still a l ot more to throw 
away as you process your stuff. 
Processing all the things in your world will make y ou more 
conscious of what you are going to do and what you should not be 
doing. One director of a foundation I worked with d iscovered that 
he had allowed way too many e-mails (thousands!) to  accumulate—
e-mails that in fact he wasn't ever going to respon d to anyway. He 
told me that using my method forced him to "go on a  healthy 
diet" about what he would allow to hang around his world as an 
incompletion. 
It's likely that at some point you'll come up again st the question 
125 
126 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWO 
of whether or not to keep something for future refe rence. I have 
two ways of dealing with that: 
• When in doubt, throw it out. 
• When in doubt, keep it. 
Take your pick. I think either approach is fine. Yo u just need to 
trust your intuition and be realistic about your sp ace. Most people 
have some angst about all of this because their sys tems have never 
really been totally functional and clear-edged befo re. If you make 
a clean distinction between what's reference and su pplies and 
what requires action, and if your reference system is simple and 
workable, you can easily keep as much material as y ou can accom- 
modate. Since no action is required on it, it's jus t a matter of 
physical space and logistics. 
Filing experts can offer you more detailed guidelin es about 
all this, and your CPA can provide record-retention  timetables 
that will tell you how long you should keep what ki nds of docu- 
mentation. My suggestion is that you make the disti nction about 
whether something is actionable or not. Once it's c lear that no 
action is needed, there's room for lots of options.
Incubate 
There will probably be things in your in-basket abo ut which you 
will say to yourself, "There's nothing to do on thi s now, but there 
might be later." Examples of this would be: 
• A flier announcing a chamber of commerce breakfast with a 
guest speaker you might want to hear, but it's two weeks away, 
and you're not sure yet if you'll be at home then o r out of town 
on a business trip. 
• An agenda for a board meeting you've been invited t o attend in 
three weeks. No action is required on it, other tha n your briefing 
yourself a day ahead of the meeting by reading the agenda. 
CHAPTER 6  |  PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTY 
• An advertisement for the next Quicken software upgr ade for 
your personal finances. Do you really need this nex t version? 
You don't know .. . you'd rather sleep on it for an other week. 
• An idea you had about something you might want to d o for 
next year's annual sales meeting. There's nothing t o do on this 
now, but you'd like to be reminded when the time co mes to 
start planning for it. 
•A note to yourself about taking a watercolor class , which you 
have zero time for right now. 
What do you do with these kinds of things? There ar e two 
options that could work: 
• Write them on a "Someday/Maybe" list. 
• Put them on your calendar or in a "tickler" file. 
The point of all of these incubation procedures is that they 
give you a way to get the items off your mind right now and let 
you feel confident that some reminder of the possib le action will 
resurface at an appropriate time. I'll elaborate on  these in more 
detail in the next chapter, on organizing. For now, just put a Post- 
it on such items, and label them "maybe" or "remind  on Octo- 
ber 17," and set them aside in a "pending" category  you will be 
accumulating for later sorting.* 
Reference 
Many of the things you will uncover in "in" will ne ed no action but 
may have value as potentially useful information ab out projects 
*One of your extra stack baskets is ideal for this purpose. Use it temporarily 
during this initial processing to gather things to organize later. Afterward you 
can use it to hold pending work-in-progress papers and physical reminders of 
next actions. 
127 
128 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
4ft 
and topics. Ideally, you have already set up a work able filing system 
(as described in chapter 4) for your reference and support infor- 
mation. As you come across material in your in-bask et and e-mail 
that you'd like to keep for archival or support pur poses, file it. 
You'll probably discover that there are lots of mis cellaneous 
kinds of things that you want to keep but have pile d up in stacks 
or stuffed into drawers because your reference syst em was too for- 
mal or just plain nonexistent. Let me remind you he re that a less- 
than-sixty-second, fun-to-use general-reference fil ing system 
within arm's reach of where you sit is a mission-cr itical compo- 
nent of full implementation of this methodology. In  the "battle 
zone" of real life, if it's not easy, fast, and fun  to file, you'll stack 
instead of organizing. And then it will become much  more diffi- 
cult to keep things processed. 
Whenever you come across something you want to keep , 
make a label for it, put it in a file folder, and t uck that into your fil- 
ing drawer. Or put a Post-it on it instructing your  secretary or 
assistant to do the same. In my early days of coach ing I used to 
give my clients permission to keep a "To File" pile . No longer. I 
discovered that if you can't get it into your syste m immediately, 
you're probably not ever going to. If you won't do it now, you 
likely won't do it later, either. 
And If There Is an Action . . . What Is It? 
This is the biggie. If there's something that needs  to be done 
about the item in "in," then you need to decide wha t exactly 
that next action is. "Next Actions" again, means th e next physical, 
visible activity that would be required to move the  situation toward 
closure. 
This is both easier and more difficult than it soun ds. 
The next action should be easy to figure out, but there are 
often some quick analyses and several planning step s that haven't 
occurred yet in your mind, and these have to happen  before you 
can determine precisely what has to happen to compl ete the item, 
even if it's a fairly simple one. 
CHAPTER 6 |  PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTY 
Let's look at a sample list of the things that a pe rson might 
typically have his attention on. 
• Clean the garage 
• Do my taxes 
•- Conference I'm going to 
• Bobby's birthday 
• Press release 
• Performance reviews 
• Management changes 
Although each of these items may seem relatively cl ear as a 
task or project, determining the next action on eac h one will take 
some thought. 
•Clean the garage 
. . . Well, I just have to get in there and start. No, wa it a minute, 
there's a big refrigerator in there that I need to get rid of first. I should 
find out if John Patrick wants it for his camp. I sh ould ... 
•Call John re refrigerator in garage 
What about. . . 
•Do my taxes 
. . . but I actually cant start on them until I have my l ast K-l 
back. Can't do any thing until then. So I'm.. . 
•Waiting for K-l from Acme Trust 
And for the. . . 
•Conference I'm going to 
129 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
. . . I need to find out whether Sandra is going to prepa re a press 
kit for us. I guess I need to. . . 
• E-mail Sandra re press kits for the conference 
. . . and so forth. The action steps—"Call John," 
"Waiting 
for K-l," "E-mail Sandra"—are what need to be decid ed about 
everything that is actionable in your in-basket. 
The Action Step Needs to Be the Absolute Next Physi cal Thing to Do 
Remember that these are physical, visible activitie s. Many people 
think they've determined the "next action" when the y get it down 
to "set meeting." But that's not the next action, 
because it's not descriptive of physical behavior. How 
do you set a meeting? Well, it could be with a phon e 
call or an e-mail, but to whom? Decide. If you don' t 
decide now, you'll still have to decide at some oth er 
point, and what this process is designed to do is a ctu- 
ally get you to finish the thinking exercise about this 
item. If you haven't identified the next physical 
action required to kick-start it, there will be a p sy- 
chological gap every time you think about it even 
vaguely. You'll tend to resist noticing it. 
When you get to a phone or to your computer, you wa nt to 
have all your thinking completed so you can use the  tools you 
have and the location you're in to more easily get things done, 
having already defined what there is to do. 
What if you say to yourself, "Well, the next thing I need to 
do is decide what to do about this?" That's a trick y one. Deciding 
isn't really an action, because actions take time, and deciding 
doesn't. There's always some physical activity that
can be done to facilitate your decision-making. 
Ninety-nine percent of the time you just need more 
information before you can make a decision. That 
additional  information   can  come  from  external
130 Until you know 
what the next 
physical action is, 
there's still more 
thinking required 
before anything can 
happen. 
Determine what you 
need to do in order 
to decide. 
CHAPTER 6  |  PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTY 
sources ("Call Susan to get her input on the propos al") or from 
internal thinking ("Draft ideas about new reorganiz ation"). 
Either way, there's still a next action to be deter mined in order to 
move the project forward. 
Once You Decide What the Action Step is 
You have three options once you decide what the nex t action 
really is. 
• Do it (if the action takes less than two minutes). 
• Delegate it (if you're not the most appropriate person to do th e 
action). 
• Defer it into your organization system as an option for work  to 
do later. 
Do It
If the next action can be done in two minutes or le ss, do it when 
you first pick the item up. If the memo requires ju st a thirty- 
second reading and then a quick "yes"/"no"/other re sponse on a 
Post-it back to the sender, do it now. If you can b rowse the catalog 
in just a minute or two to see if there might be an ything of inter- 
est in it, browse away, and then toss it, route it,  or reference it as 
required. If the next action on something is to lea ve a quick mes- 
sage on someone's voice-mail, make the call now. 
Even if the item is not a "high priority" one, do i t now if 
you're ever going to do it at all. The rationale fo r the two-minute 
rule is that that's more or less the point where it  starts taking 
longer to store and track an item than to deal with  it the first time 
it's in your hands-—in other words, it's the effici ency cutoff. If the 
thing's not important enough to be done, throw it away. If it is, 
and if you're going to do it sometime, the efficien cy factor should 
come into play. 
Many people find that getting into the habit of fol lowing the 
two-minute rule creates a dramatic improvement in t heir produc- 
tivity. One vice president of a large software comp any told me 
131 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWO 
that it gave him an additional hour a day of qualit y discretionary 
time! He was one of those 300-e-mails-a-day high-te ch execu- 
tives, highly focused for most of the workday on 
three key initiatives. Many of those e-mails were 
from people who reported to him—and they needed 
his eyes on something, his comments and OKs, in 
order to move forward. But because they were not on  a topic in 
his rifle sights, he would just stage the e-mails i n "in," to get to 
"later." After several thousand of them piled up, h e would have to 
go in to work and spend whole weekends trying to ca tch up. That 
would have been OK if he were twenty-six, when ever ything's an 
adrenaline rush anyway, but he was in his thirties and had young 
kids. Working all weekend was no longer acceptable behavior. 
When I coached him we went through all 800-plus e-m ails he 
currently had in "in." It turned out that a lot cou ld be dumped, 
quite a few needed to be filed as reference, and ma ny others 
required less-than-two-minute replies that he whipp ed through. I 
checked with him a year later, and he was still cur rent! He never 
let his e-mails mount up beyond a screenful anymore . He said it 
had changed the nature of his division because of t he dramatic 
decrease in his own response time. His staff though t he was now 
made of Teflon! 
That's a rather dramatic testimonial, but it's an i ndication of 
just how critical some of these simple processing b ehaviors can be, 
especially as the volume and speed of the input inc rease for you 
personally. 
Two minutes is in fact just a guideline. If you hav e a long 
open window of time in which to process your in-bas ket, you can 
extend the cutoff for each item to five or ten minu tes. If you've got 
to get to the bottom of all your input rapidly, in order to figure out 
how best to use your afternoon, then you may want t o shorten the 
time to one minute, or even thirty seconds, so you can get through 
everything a little faster. 
It's not a bad idea to time yourself for a few of t hese while 
you're becoming familiar with the process. Most cli ents I work 
132 The two-minute 
rule is magic. 
CHAPTERS  |  PROCESSING: SETTING "IN" TO EMPTY 
with have difficulty estimating how long two min- 
utes actually is, and they greatly underestimate how 
long certain actions are likely to take. For instan ce, if 
your action is to leave someone a message, and you 
get the real person instead of his or her voice-mai l, 
the call will usually take quite a bit longer than two 
minutes. 
There's nothing you really need to track about 
your two-minute actions—you just do them. If, howev er, you take 
an action and don't finish the project with that on e action, you'll 
need to clarify what's next on it, and manage that according to the 
same criteria. For instance, if you act to replace the cartridge in 
your favorite pen and discover that you're out of c artridge refills, 
you'll want to decide on the next action about gett ing them ("Buy 
refills at the store") and do, delegate, or defer it appropriately. 
Adhere to the two-minute rule and see how much you get 
done in the process of clearing out your "in" stack s. Many people 
are amazed by how many two-minute actions are possi ble, often 
on some of their most critical current projects. 
Let me make one more observation regarding the two-
minute rule, this time as it relates to your comfor t with typing 
e-mails. If you're in a large-volume e-mail environ ment, you'll 
greatly improve your productivity by increasing you r typing speed 
and using the shortcut keyboard commands for your o perating 
system and your common e-mail software. Too many so phisti- 
cated professionals are seriously hamstrung because  they still hunt 
and peck and try to use their mouse too much. More work could 
be dispatched faster by combining the two-minute ru le with 
improved computer skills. I've found that many exec utives aren't 
resisting technology, they're just resisting their keyboards! 
Delegate It 
If the next action is going to take longer than two  minutes, ask 
yourself, "Am I the best person to be doing it?" If  not, hand it off 
to the appropriate party, in a systematic format. 
133 You'll be surprised 
how many two- 
minute actions you 
can perform even 
on your most
critical projects.
134 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWO 
Delegation is not always downstream. You may decide , "This 
has got to get over to Customer Service," or "My bo ss needs to 
put his eyes on this next," or "I need my partner's  point of view on 
this." 
A "systematic format" could be any of the following : 
• Send the appropriate party an e-mail. 
• Write a note or an overnote on paper and route the item "out" 
to that person. 
• Leave him or her a voice-mail. 
• Add it as an agenda item on a list for your next re al-time 
conversation with that person. 
• Talk to him or her directly, either face-to-face or  by phone. 
Although any of these options can work, I would rec om- 
mend them in the above order, top to bottom. E-mail  is usually 
the fastest mode into the system; it provides an el ectronic record; 
and the receiver gets to deal with it at his or her  convenience. 
Written notes are next because they too can get int o the system 
immediately, and the recipient then has a physical particle to use 
as an organizational reminder. If you're passing on  paper-based 
material as part of the handoff, a written communic ation is obvi- 
ously the way to go; as with e-mail, the person you  hand it off to 
can then deal with it on his or her own schedule. V oice-mail can 
be efficient, and many professionals live by it; th e downside is that 
tracking becomes an additional requirement for both  you and the 
recipient, and what you say is not always what gets  heard. Next 
would be saving the communication on an agenda list  or in a 
folder for your next regular meeting with the perso n. Sometimes 
this is necessary because of the sensitive or detai led nature of the 
topic, but it then must wait to get moving until th at meeting 
occurs. The least preferable option would be to int errupt what 
both you and the person are doing to talk about the  item. This is 
immediate, but it hampers workflow for both of you and has the 
same downside as voice-mail: no written record. 
CHAPTER 6  I  PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTY 
Tracking the Handoff If you do delegate an action to someone 
else, and if you care at all whether something happ ens as a result, 
you'll need to track it. As I will walk you through  in the next 
chapter, about organizing, you'll see that a significant category to 
manage is "Waiting For." 
As you develop your own customized system, what you
eventually hand off and then track could look like a list in a plan- 
ner, a file folder holding separate papers for each  item, and/or a 
list categorized as "Waiting For" in your software.  For now, if you 
don't have a trusted system set up already, just pu t a note on a 
piece of paper—"W/F: reply from Bob"—and put that i nto a 
"Pending" stack of notes in a separate pile or tray  that may result 
from your processing. 
What If the Ball Is Already in Someone Else's Court ? In the exam- 
ple cited above about waiting for the last K-l to c ome in so you 
can do your taxes, the next action is currently on someone else's 
plate. In such situations you will also want to tra ck the action as a 
delegated item, or as a "Waiting For." On the paper  that says "Do 
my taxes," write something like "Waiting for K-l fr om Acme 
Trust" and put that into your "Pending" stack. 
It's important that you record the date on everythi ng you 
hand off to others. This, of all the categories in your personal sys- 
tem, is the most crucial one to keep tabs on. The f ew times you 
will actually want to refer to that information ("B ut I called and 
ordered that on March 12") will make it worth estab lishing this as 
a lifelong habit. 
Defer It 
It's likely that most of the next actions you deter mine for things in 
"in" will be yours to do and will take longer than two minutes to 
complete. A call you need to make to a customer; an  e-mail you 
need to spend a little time thinking about and draf ting to your 
team; a gift you need to buy for your brother at th e stationery 
store; a piece of software you need to download fro m the Web and 
135 
136 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWO 
try out; a conversation you must have with your spo use about an 
investment you think you should make—all of these f it that 
description. 
These actions will have to be written down somewher e and 
then organized in the appropriate categories so you  can access 
them when you need to. For the moment, go ahead and  put Post- 
its on the pieces of paper in "in," with the action  written on them, 
and add these to the "Pending" stack of papers that  have been 
processed. 
The "Pending" Things That Are Left 
If you follow the instructions in this chapter, you 'll dump a mess 
of things, file a bunch, do a lot of two-minute act ions, and hand 
off a number of items to other people. You'll also wind up with 
a stack of items that have actions associated with them that you 
still need to do—soon, someday, or on a specific da te—and 
reminders of things you're waiting on from other pe ople. This 
"Pending" group is made up of the actions you've de legated or 
deferred. It is what still needs to be organized in  some fashion in 
your personal system, a topic I'll cover in step-by -step detail 
in the next chapter. 
Identifying the Projects You Have 
This last step in getting to the bottom of "in" req uires a shift in 
perspective from the single-action details to the l arger picture—
your projects. 
Again, I define a "project" as any outcome you're c ommitted 
to achieving that will take more than one action st ep to complete. 
If you look through an inventory of actions that yo u have already 
been generating—"Call Frank about the car alarm"; " E-mail 
Bernadette re conference materials"—you'll no doubt  recognize a 
number of things that are larger than the single ac tion you've 
defined. There's still going to be something about "car alarm" to 
CHAPTER 6  |  PROCESSING: GETTING "IN" TO EMPTY 
do after the call to Frank, and there will still be  something to han- 
dle about the conference after the e-mail to Bernad ette. 
I hope you're able to see the very practical reason  for defining 
projects as broadly as I do: If the action step you 've identified will 
not complete the commitment, then you'll need 
some stake in the ground to keep reminding you 
of actions you have pending until you have closure.
You need to make a list of projects. A "Projects" l ist 
may include anything from "Give holiday party" to 
"Divest the Widget product line" to "Finalize com- 
pensation package." The purpose of this list is not  to 
reflect your priorities but just to ensure that you 've 
got placeholders for all those open loops. 
Whether you draw up your "Projects" list while you' re ini- 
tially processing your in-basket or after you've se t up your action 
lists doesn't really matter. It just needs to be do ne at some point, 
and it must be maintained, as it's the key driver f or reviewing 
where you are and where you want to be. 
For now, let's make sure your organizing setup is " all sys- 
tems go." 
137 Right now you 
probably have 
between thirty and a 
hundred projects.