104 Collection: Corralling Your "Stuff" 
IN CHAPTER 2 I described the basic procedures for collecting your work. 
This chapter will lead you in more detail through t he process of 
getting all your incompletes, all your "stuff," int o one place—into 
"in." That's the critical first step in getting to the state of "mind like 
water." Just gathering a few more things than you c urrently have 
will probably create a positive feeling for you. Bu t if you can hang in 
there and really do the whole collection process, 1 00 percent, it will 
change your experience dramatically and give you an  important 
new reference point for being on top of your work. 
When I coach a client through this process, the col lection 
phase usually takes between one and six hours, thou gh it did take 
all of twenty hours with one person (finally I told  him, "You get 
the idea"). It can take longer than you think if yo u are committed 
to a full-blown capture that will include everythin g at work and 
everywhere else. That means going through every sto rage area 
and every nook and cranny in every location, includ ing cars, 
boats, and other homes, if you have them. 
Be assured that if you give yourself at least a cou ple of hours 
to tackle this part, you can grab the major portion  of things out- 
standing. And you can even capture the rest by crea ting relevant 
placeholding notes—for example, "Purge and process boat stor- 
age shed" and "Deal with hall closet." 
In the real world, you probably won't be able to ke ep your 
stuff 100 percent collected all of the time. If you 're like most peo- 
ple, you'll move too fast and be engaged in too man y things dur- 
CHAPTER 5  I  COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF" 
ing the course of a week to get all your ideas and commitments 
captured outside your head. But it should become an  ideal stan- 
dard that keeps you motivated to consistently "clea n house" of all 
the things about your work and life that have your attention. 
Ready, Set. . . 
There are very practical reasons to gather everythi ng before you 
start processing it: 
1 |   it's helpful to have a sense of the volume of stuff you have to 
deal with; 
2 |   it lets you know where the "end of the tunnel" is; and 
3 |   when you're processing and organizing, you don't want to be 
distracted psychologically by an amorphous mass of stuff 
that might still be "somewhere." Once you have all the things 
that require your attention gathered in one place, you'll auto- 
matically be operating from a state of enhanced foc us and 
control. 
It can be daunting to capture into one location, at  one time, 
all the things that don't belong where they are. It  may even seem a 
little counterintuitive, because for the most part,  most of that stuff 
was not, and is not, "that important"; that's why i t's still lying 
around. It wasn't an urgent thing when it first sho wed up, and 
probably nothing's blown up yet because it hasn't b een dealt with. 
It's the business card you put in your wallet of so mebody you 
thought you might want to contact sometime. It's th e little piece 
of techno-gear in the bottom desk drawer that you'r e missing a 
part for. It's the printer that you keep telling yo urself you're going 
to move to a better location in your office. These are the kinds of 
things that nag at you but that you haven't decided  either to deal 
with or to drop entirely from your list of open loo ps. But because 
you think there still could be something important in there, that 
105 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWO 
"stuff" is controlling you and taking up more psychic energy than it 
deserves. Keep in mind, you can feel good about wha t you're not 
doing, only when you know what you're not doing. 
So it's time to begin. Grab your in-basket and a ha lf-inch 
stack of plain paper for your notes, and let's . . . 
... Go! 
Physical Gathering 
The first activity is to search your physical envir on- 
ment for anything that doesn't belong where it is, the 
way it is, permanently, and put it into your in-bas ket. 
You'll be gathering things that are incomplete, thi ngs 
that have some decision about potential action tied
to them. They all go into "in," so they'll be avail able 
for later processing. 
106 What Stays Where It Is 
The best way to create a clean decision about wheth er something 
should go into the in-basket is to understand clear ly what shouldn't 
go in. Here are the four categories of things that can remain 
where they are, the way they are, with no action ti ed to them: 
• Supplies 
• Reference material 
• Decoration 
• Equipment 
Supplies . . . include anything you need to keep because you use 
it regularly. Stationery, business cards, stamps, s taples, Post-it 
pads, legal pads, paper clips, ballpoint refills, b atteries, forms you 
need to fill out from time to time, rubber bands—al l of these 
qualify. Many people also have a "personal supplies " drawer at 
work containing dental floss, Kleenex, breath mints , and so on. Train yourself to 
notice and collect 
anything that 
doesn't belong 
where it is forever. 
CHAPTER 5  I  COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF" 
Reference Material ... is anything you simply keep for informa- 
tion as needed, such as manuals for your software, the local take- 
out deli menu, or your kid's soccer schedule. This category 
includes your telephone and address information, an y material 
relevant to projects, themes, and topics, and sourc es such as dic- 
tionaries, encyclopedias, and almanacs. 
Decoration . . . means pictures of family, artwork, and fun and 
inspiring things pinned to your bulletin board. You  also might 
have plaques, mementos, and/or plants. 
Equipment ... is obviously the telephone, computer, fax, prin ter, 
wastebasket, furniture, and/or VCR. 
You no doubt have a lot of things that fall into th ese four catego- 
ries—basically all your tools and your gear, which have no 
actions 
tied to them. Everything else goes into "in." But m any of the 
things you might initially interpret as supplies, r eference, decora- 
tion, or equipment could also have action associate d with them 
because they still aren't exactly the way they need  to be. 
For instance, most people have, in their desk drawe rs and on 
their credenzas and bulletin boards, a lot of refer ence materials 
that either are out of date or need to be organized  somewhere 
else. Those should go into "in." Likewise, if your supplies drawer 
is out of control, full of lots of dead or unorgani zed stuff, that's an 
incomplete that needs to be captured. Are the photo s of your kids 
current ones? Is the artwork what you want on the wall? Are the 
mementos really something you still want to keep? I s the furni- 
ture precisely the way it should be? Is the compute r set up the way 
you want it? Are the plants in your office alive? I n other words, 
supplies, reference materials, decoration, and equi pment may 
need to be tossed into the in-basket if they're not  just where they 
should be, the way they should be. 
107 
108 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWO 
Issues About Collecting 
As you engage in the collecting phase, you may run into one or 
more of the following: 
• you've got a lot more than will fit into one in-bas ket; 
• you're likely to get derailed into purging and orga nizing; 
• you may have some form of stuff already collected a nd 
organized; and/or 
• you're likely to run across some critical things th at you want to 
keep in front of you. 
What If an Item Is Too Big to Go in the In-Basket? If you can't 
physically put something in the in-basket, then wri te a note on a 
piece of letter-size plain paper to represent it. F or instance, if you 
have a poster or other piece of artwork behind the door to your 
office, just write "Artwork behind door" on a lette r-size piece of 
paper and put the paper in the in-basket. 
Be sure to date it, too. This has a couple of benef its. If your 
organization system winds up containing some of the se pieces of 
paper representing something else, it'll be useful to know when the 
note was created. It's also just a great habit to d ate everything you 
hand-write, from Post-it notes to your assistant, t o voice-mails you 
download onto a pad, to notes you take on a phone c all with a 
client. The 3 percent of the time that this little piece of informa- 
tion will be extremely useful makes it worth develo ping the habit. 
What If the Pile Is Too Big to Fit into the In-Bask et? If you're like 
98 percent of my clients, your initial gathering ac tivity will collect 
much more than can be comfortably stacked in an in- basket. If 
that's the case, just create stacks around the in-b asket, and maybe 
even on the floor underneath it. Ultimately you'll be emptying the 
in-stacks, as you process and organize everything. In the mean- 
time, though, make sure that there's some obvious v isual distinc- 
tion between the stacks that are "in" and everythin g else. 
CHAPTER 5  |  COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF" 
Instant Dumping If it's immediately evident that something is 
trash, go ahead and toss it when you see it. For so me of my clients, 
this marks the first time they have ever cleaned th eir center desk 
drawer! 
If you're not sure what something is or whether it' s worth 
keeping, go ahead and put it into "in." You'll be a ble to decide 
about it later, when you process the in-basket. Wha t you don't 
want to do is to let yourself get wrapped up in thi ngs piece by 
piece, trying to decide this or that. You'll do that later anyway  if 
it's in "in," and it's easier to make those kinds o f choices when 
you're in processing mode. The objective for the co llection process 
is to get everything into "in" as quickly as possible so you've appro- 
priately retrenched and "drawn the battle lines." 
Be Careful of the Purge-and-Organize Bug! Many people get hit 
with the purge-and-organize virus as they're going through vari- 
ous areas of their office (and their home). If that  happens to you, 
it's OK, so long as you have a major open window of  time to get 
through the whole process (like at least a whole we ek ahead of 
you). Otherwise you'll need to break it up into chu nks and cap- 
ture them as little projects or actions to do, with  reminders in your 
system, like "Purge four-drawer cabinet" or "Clean office closet." 
What you don't want to do is let yourself get caught running 
down a rabbit trail cleaning up some piece of your work and then 
not be able to get through the whole action-managem ent imple- 
mentation process. It may take longer than you thin k, and you 
want to go for the gold and finish processing all y our stuff and set- 
ting up your system as soon as possible. 
What About Things That Are Already on Lists and in Organizers'? 
You may already have some lists and some sort of or ganization 
system in place. But unless you're thoroughly famil iar with this 
workflow-processing model and have implemented it p reviously, 
I recommend that you treat those lists as items sti ll to be pro- 
cessed, like everything else in "in." You'll want y our system to be 
109 
110 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
consistent, and it'll be necessary to evaluate ever ything from the 
same viewpoint to get it that way. 
"But I Can't Lose That Thing . . . !" Often in the collection 
process someone will run across a piece of paper or  a document 
that causes her to say, "Oh, my God! I forgot about  that! I've got to 
deal with that!" It could be a phone slip with a re turn call she was 
supposed to handle two days before, or some meeting  notes that 
remind her of an action she was supposed to take we eks ago. She 
doesn't want to put whatever it is into the huge st ack of other stuff 
in her in-basket because she's afraid she might los e track of it 
again. 
If that happens to you, first ask yourself if it's something that 
really has to be handled before you get though this initial im ple- 
mentation time. If so, best deal with it immediatel y so you get it 
off your mind. If not, go ahead and put it into "in ." You're going to 
get all that processed and emptied soon anyway, so it won't be 
lost. 
If you can't deal with the action in the moment, an d you still 
just have to have the reminder right in front of you, go ahea d and 
create an "emergency" stack somewhere close at hand . It's not an 
ideal solution, but it'll do. Keep in mind that som e potential anx- 
iousness is going to surface as you make your stuff  more conscious 
to you than it's been. Create whatever supports you  need. 
Start with Your Desktop 
Ready now? OK. Start piling those things on your de sk into "in." 
Often there'll be numerous things right at hand tha t need to go 
in 
there. Many people use their whole desktop as "in";  if you're one 
of them, you'll have several stacks around you to b egin your "in" 
collection with. Start at one end of your work spac e and move 
around, dealing with everything on every cubic inch . Typical 
items will be: 
• Stacks of mail and memos 
• Phone slips 
CHAPTER 5  |  COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF" 
• Collected business cards 
• Notes from meetings 
Resist the urge to say, as almost everyone does ini tially, "Well, I 
know what's in that stack, and that's where I want to leave it." 
That's exactly what hasn't worked before, and it all needs to go 
into the in-basket. 
As you go around your desktop, ask yourself if you have any 
intention of changing any of the tools or equipment  there. Is your 
phone OK? Your computer? The desk itself? If anythi ng needs 
changing, write a note about it and toss it into "i n." 
Desk Drawers 
Next tackle the desk drawers, if you have them, one  at a time. Any 
attention on anything in there? Any actionable item s? Is there 
anything that doesn't belong there? If the answer t o any of these 
questions is yes, put the actionable item into "in"  or write a note 
about it. Again, whether you use this opportunity t o clean and 
organize the drawers or simply make a note to do it  later will 
depend on how much time you have and how much stuff  is in 
there. 
Countertops 
Continue working your way around your office, colle cting every- 
thing sitting on the tops of credenzas or counters or cabinets that 
doesn't belong there permanently. Often there will be stacks of 
reading material, mail, and miscellaneous folders a nd support 
material for actions and projects. Collect it all. 
Maybe there is reference material that you've alrea dy used 
and just left out. If that's so, and if you can ret urn it to the file 
cabinet or the bookshelf in just a second, go ahead  and do that. Be 
careful to check with yourself, though, about wheth er there is 
some potential action tied to the material before y ou put it away. 
If there is, put it into "in" so you can deal with it later in the 
process. 
111 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWO 
Inside the Cabinets 
Now look inside the cabinets. What's in there? Thes e are perfect 
areas for stashing large supplies and reference mat erials, and 
equally seductive for holding deeper levels of stuf f. 
Any broken or out-of-date things in there? Often I' ll 
find collectibles and nostalgia that aren't meaning ful 
to my clients any longer. One general manager of an
insurance office, for example, wound up tossing out
at least a small Dumpster's worth of "recognition" 
awards he had accumulated over the years. 
Again, if some of these areas are out of control an d need 
purging and organizing, write that on a note and to ss it into "in." 
Floors, Walls, and Shelves 
Anything on bulletin boards that needs action? Anyt hing tacked 
onto the walls that doesn't belong there? Any atten tion on your 
pictures, artwork, plaques, or decorations? How abo ut the open 
shelves? Any books that need to be read or donated?  Any cata- 
logs, manuals, or three-ring binders that are out o f date or have 
some potential action associated with them? Any pil es or stacks of 
things on the floor? Just scoot them over next to y our in-basket to 
add to the inventory. 
Equipment, Furniture, arid Fixtures 
Is there anything you want to do to or change about  any of your 
office equipment or furniture or the physical space  itself? Does 
everything work? Do you have all the lighting you n eed? If there are 
actionable items, you know what to do: make a note and put it in "in." 
Other Locations 
Depending on the scope of what you're addressing in  this process, 
you may want to do some version of the same kind of  gathering 
anywhere else you keep stuff. If you're determined to get to a 
really empty head, it's imperative that you do it everywhere. 
112 Consider whether 
your collectible and 
nostalgia items are 
still meaningful to 
you. 
CHAPTER 5  I  COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF" 
Some executives I work with find it immensely 
valuable to take me home with them and have me 
walk them through this process there as well. Often
they've allowed the "not so important" trap to ensn are 
them in their home life, and it has gnawed away at 
their energy. Don't let the "not
so important" trap 
gnaw away your 
energy at home.
Mental Gathering: The Mind-Sweep 
Once you feel you've collected all the physical thi ngs in your envi- 
ronment that need processing, you'll want to collec t anything else 
that may be residing in your psychic RAM. What has your atten- 
tion that isn't represented by something already in  your in-basket? 
This is where the stack of plain paper really comes  into play. 
I recommend that you write out each thought, each i dea, each 
project or thing that has your attention, on a separate sheet of paper. 
You could make one long list on a pad, but given ho w you will 
later be processing each item individually, it's ac tually more effec- 
tive to put everything on separate sheets. You will  likely not keep 
these pieces of paper (unless you decide that low-t ech is your best 
organizing method), but it'll be handy to have them  as discrete 
items to deal with as you're processing. 
It will probably take you between twenty minutes an d an 
hour to clear your head onto separate notes, after you've gathered 
everything else. You'll find that things will tend to occur to you in 
somewhat random fashion—little things, big things, personal 
things, professional things, in no particular order . 
In this instance, go for quantity. It's much better  to overdo 
this process than to risk missing something. You ca n always toss 
the junk later. Your first idea may be "Save the oz one layer," and 
then you'll think, "I need cat food!" Grab them all . Don't be sur- 
prised if you discover you've created quite a stack  of paper in "in" 
during this procedure. 
113 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWO 
"Trigger" List 
To assist in clearing your head, you may want to re view the 
following "Incompletion Triggers" list, item by ite m, to see if 
you've forgotten anything. Often you'll just need a  jog to unearth 
something lurking in a corner of your mind. Remembe r, when 
something occurs to you, write it on a piece of pap er and toss it 
into "in." 
"Incompletion Triggers" List 
Professional 
Projects started, not completed 
Projects that need to be started 
Commitments/promises to others 
Boss/partners 
Colleagues 
Subordinates 
Other people in organization 
"Outside" people 
Customers 
Other organizations 
Professionals 
Communications to make/get     ,
Internal/External
Initiate or respond to:
Phone calls 
Voice-mail
E-mail
Pages 
Faxes 
Letters 
Memos 
Other writing to finish/submit
Reports Evaluations/reviews 
Proposals 
Articles 
Promotional materials 
Manuals/instructions 
Rewrites and edits 
Meetings that need to be set/requested 
Who needs to know about what
decisions? 
Significant read/review 
Financial
Cash flow 
Statistics 
Budgets 
Forecasts/projections 
P&Ls 
Balance sheet
Credit line 
Planning/organizing 
Formal planning (goals, targets,
objectives) 
Current projects (next stages) 
Upcoming projects 
114 
CHAPTER 5  I  COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF" 
Business/marketing plans 
Organizational initiatives 
Upcoming events 
Meetings 
Presentations 
Organizational structuring 
Changes in facilities 
Installation of new systems/equipment
Travel
Banks 
Receivables 
Payables 
Petty cash 
Administration 
Legal issues 
Insurance 
Personnel
Policies/procedures 
Customers 
Internal
External
Marketing 
Promotion 
Sales 
Customer service 
Systems 
Phones 
Computers 
Office equipment 
Other equipment 
Utilities 
Filing 
Storage 
Inventories Supplies 
Office/site 
Office organization 
, Furniture 
Decorations 
Waiting for...
Information 
Delegated tasks/projects 
Completions critical to projects 
Replies to:
Letters 
Memos 
Calls 
Proposals 
Requisitions 
Reimbursements 
Petty cash 
Insurance 
Ordered items 
Items being repaired 
Tickets 
Decisions of others 
Professional development
Training/seminars 
Things to learn 
Things to look up 
Skills to practice/learn especially re:
computers 
Tape/video training 
Resumes 
Outside education 
Research—need to find out about...
Professional wardrobe 
115 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWO 
Personal 
Projects started, not completed 
Projects that need to be started 
Commitments/promises to others 
Spouse 
Children 
Family 
Friends 
Professionals 
Borrowed items 
Projects: other organizations 
Service 
Civic 
Volunteer 
Communications to make/get
Family 
Friends 
Professional
Initiate or respond to:
Phone calls 
Letters 
Cards 
Upcoming events 
Special occasions 
Birthdays 
Anniversaries 
Weddings 
Graduations 
Holidays  . 
Travel
Weekend trips 
Vacations 
Social events 
Cultural events 
Sporting events R&D—things to do 
Places to go 
People to meet/invite 
Local attractions 
Administration 
Financial
Bills 
Banks 
Investments 
Loans 
Taxes 
Insurance 
Legal affairs 
Filing 
Waiting for...
Mail order 
Repair 
Reimbursements 
Loaned items 
Medical data 
RSVPs 
Home/household 
Landlords 
Property ownership 
Legal
Real estate 
Zoning 
Taxes 
Builders/contractors 
Heating/air-conditioning 
Plumbing 
Electricity 
Roofing 
Landscape 
116 
CHAPTER 5  |  COLLECTION: CORRALLING YOUR "STUFF" 
Driveway 
Walls/floors/ceilings 
Decoration 
Furniture 
Utilities 
Appliances 
Lightbulbs/wiring 
Kitchen things 
Washer/dryer/vacuum 
Areas to organize/clean 
Computers 
Software 
Hardware 
Connections 
CD-ROM 
E-mail/Internet 
TV 
VCR 
Music/CDs/tapes 
Cameras/film 
Phones 
Answering machine 
Sports equipment 
Closets/clothes Garage/storage 
Vehicle repair/maintenance 
Tools 
Luggage 
Pets 
Health care 
Doctors 
Dentists 
Specialists 
Hobbies 
Books/records/tapes/disks 
Errands 
Hardware store 
Drugstore 
Market
Bank 
Cleaner 
Stationer 
Community 
Neighborhood 
Schools 
Local government
Civic issues 
The "In" Inventory 
If your head is empty of everything, personally and  professionally, 
then your in-basket is probably quite full, and lik ely spilling over. 
In addition to the paper-based and physical items i n your in- 
basket, your inventory of "in" should include any r esident voice- 
mails and all the e-mails that are currently staged  in the "in" area 
of your communication software. It should also incl ude any items 
117 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWO 
on your organizer lists for which you have not yet determined 
next actions. 
I usually recommend that clients download 
their voice-mails onto paper notes and put those in to 
their in-baskets, along with their whole organizer 
notebooks, which usually need significant reassess-
ment. If you've been using something like a Palm 
PDA or Microsoft Outlook or Lotus Organizer for 
anything other than calendar and telephone/address 
functionality, I suggest you print out any task and  to- 
do lists and put them, too, into your in-basket. 
E-mails are best left where they are, because of th eir volume 
and the efficiency factor of dealing with them with in their own 
minisystem. 
But "In" Doesn't Stay in "In" 
When you've done all that, you're ready to take the  next step. You 
don't want to leave anything in "in" for an indefin ite period of 
time, because then it would without fail creep back  into your psy- 
che again, since your mind would know you weren't d ealing with 
it. Of course, one of the main factors in people's resistance to col- 
lecting stuff into "in" is the lack of a good proce ssing and organiz- 
ing methodology to handle it. 
That brings us to the next chapter: "Getting 'In' t o Empty." 
118 Connection is 
completed when 
you can easily see 
the edges to the 
inventory of 
everything that is 
complete.