Reviewing: Keeping Your 
System Functional 
THE PURPOSE OF this whole method of workflow manage ment is not 
to let your brain become lax, but rather to enable it to move 
toward more elegant and productive activity. In ord er to earn that 
freedom, however, your brain must engage on some co nsistent 
basis with all your commitments and activities. You  must be 
assured that you're doing what you need to be doing , and that it's 
OK to be not doing what you're not doing. Reviewing your system 
on a regular basis and keeping it current and funct ional are pre- 
requisites for that kind of control. 
If you have a list of calls you must make, for exam ple, the 
minute that list is not totally current with all the calls you need to 
make, your brain will not trust the system, and it won't get relief 
from its lower-level mental tasks. It will have to take back the job 
of remembering, processing, and reminding, which, a s you should 
know by now, it doesn't do very effectively. 
All of this means your system cannot be static. In order to 
support appropriate action choices, it must be kept  up to date. 
And it should trigger consistent and appropriate ev aluation of 
your life and work at several horizons. 
There are two major issues that need to be handled at this point: 
• What do you look at in all this, and when? 
• What do you need to do, and how often, to ensure th at all of it 
works as a consistent system, freeing you to think and manage at 
a higher level? 
181 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWO 
A real review process will lead to enhanced and pro active 
new thinking in key areas of your life and work. Su ch think- 
ing emerges from both focused concentration and ser endipi- 
tous brainstorming, which will be triggered and gal vanized 
by a consistent personal review of your inventory o f actions and 
projects. 
What to Look At, When 
Your personal system and behaviors need to be estab lished in such 
a way that you can see all the action options you n eed to see, when 
you need to see them. This is really just common se nse, but few 
people actually have their processes and their orga nization honed 
to the point where they are as functional as they c ould be. 
When you have access to a phone and any discretiona ry 
time, you ought to at least glance at the list of a ll the phone calls 
you need to make, and then either direct yourself t o the best one 
to handle or give yourself permission to feel OK ab out not both- 
ering with any of them. When you're about to go in for a discus- 
sion with your boss or your partner, take a moment to review the 
outstanding agendas you have with him or her, so yo u'll know that 
you're using your time most effectively. When you n eed to pick up 
something at the dry cleaner's, first quickly revie w all the other 
errands that you might be able to do en route. 
People often ask me, "How much time do you 
spend looking at your system?" My answer is simply,
"As much time as I need to to feel comfortable abou t 
what I'm doing." In actuality it's an accumulation of 
two seconds here, three seconds there. What most 
people don't realize is that my lists are in one se nse 
my office. Just as you might have Post-its and stac ks 
of phone slips at your workstation, so do I on my 
"Next Actions" lists. Assuming that you've complete ly collected, 
processed, and organized your stuff, you'll most li kely take only a 
182 A few seconds a 
day is usually all
you need for review, 
as long as you're 
looking at the right 
things at the right 
time. 
CHAPTER 8  |  REVIEWING: KEEPING YOUR SYSTEM FUNCTIONAL 
few brief moments here and there to access your sys tem for day- 
to-day reminders. 
Looking at Your Calendar First 
Your most frequent review will probably be of your daily calendar, 
and your daily tickler folder if you're maintaining  one, to see the 
"hard landscape" and assess what has to get done. Y ou need to 
know the time-and-space parameters first. Knowing t hat you 
have wall-to-wall meetings from 8:00 A.M. through 6:00 P.M., for 
example, with barely a half-hour break for lunch, w ill help you 
make necessary decisions about any other activities . 
. . . Then Your Action Lists 
After you review all your day- and time-specific co mmitments 
and handle whatever you need to about them, your ne xt most fre- 
quent area for review will be the lists of all the actions you could 
possibly do in your current context. If you're in y our office, for 
instance, you'll look at your lists of calls, compu ter actions, and in- 
office things to do. This doesn't necessarily mean you will actually 
be doing anything on those lists; you'll just evaluate them against 
the flow of other work coming at you to ensure that  you make the 
best choices about what to deal with. You need to f eel confident 
that you're not missing anything critical. 
Frankly, if your calendar is trustworthy and your a ction lists 
are current, they may be the only things in the sys tem you'll need 
to refer to more than every couple of days. There h ave been many 
days when I didn't need to look at any of my lists, in fact, because 
it was clear from the front end—my calendar—what I wouldn't 
be 
able to do. 
The Right Review in the Right Context 
You may need to access any one of your lists at any  time. When 
you and your spouse are decompressing at the end of  the day, 
and you want to be sure you'll take care of the "bu siness" the two 
of you manage together about home and family, you'l l want to 
183 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWO 
look at your accumulated agendas for him or her. On  the other 
hand, if your boss pops in for a face-to-face conve rsation about 
current realities and priorities, it will be highly  functional for you 
to have your "Projects" list up to date and your "A genda" list for 
him or her right at hand. 
Updating Your System 
The real trick to ensuring the trustworthiness of th e whole organiza- 
tion system lies in regularly refreshing your psych e and your system 
from a more elevated perspective. That's impossible  to 
do, however, if your lists fall too far behind your  reality. 
You won't be able to fool yourself about this: if y our sys- 
tem is out of date, your brain will be forced to fu lly 
engage again at the lower level of remembering. 
This is perhaps the biggest challenge of all. 
Once you've tasted what it's like to have a clear h ead 
and feel in control of everything that's going on, can 
you do what you need to to maintain that as an 
operational standard? The many years I've spent 
researching and implementing this  methodology 
with countless people have proved to me that the ma gic key to the 
sustainability of the process is the Weekly Review.
The Power of the Weekly Review 
If you're like me and most other people, no matter how good your 
intentions may be, you're going to have the world c ome at you 
faster than you can keep up. Many of us seem to hav e it in our 
natures consistently to entangle ourselves in more than we have 
the ability to handle. We book ourselves back to ba ck in meetings 
all day, go to after-hours events that generate ide as and commit- 
ments we need to deal with, and get embroiled in en gagements 
and projects that have the potential to spin our cr eative intelli- 
gence into cosmic orbits. 1
184 To make 
knowledge 
productive, we 
will have to learn 
to see both forest 
and tree. We will 
have to learn to 
connect. 
—Peter F. 
CHAPTER 8  |  REVIEWING: KEEPING YOUR SYSTEM FUNCTIONAL 
That whirlwind of activity is precisely what makes the 
Weekly Review so valuable. It builds in some captur ing, reeval- 
uation, and reprocessing time to keep you in bal- 
ance. There is simply no way to do this necessary 
regrouping while you're trying to get everyday work
done. 
The Weekly Review will also sharpen your intu- 
itive focus on your important projects as you deal 
with the flood of new input and potential distrac- 
tions coming at you the rest of the week. You're go ing 
to have to learn to say no—faster, and to more thin gs—in order to 
stay afloat and comfortable. Having some dedicated time in 
which to at least get up to the project level of th inking goes a long 
way toward making that easier. 
What Is the Weekly Review? 
Very simply, the Weekly Review is whatever you need  to do to get 
your head empty again. It's going through the five phases of 
workflow management—collecting, processing, organiz ing, and 
reviewing all your outstanding involvements—until y ou can hon- 
estly say, "I absolutely know right now everything I'm not doing 
but could be doing if I decided to." 
From a nitty-gritty, practical standpoint, here is the drill that 
can get you there: 
Loose Papers Pull out all miscellaneous scraps of paper, busines s 
cards, receipts, and so on that have crept into the  crevices of your 
desk, clothing, and accessories. Put it all into yo ur in-basket for 
processing. 
Process Your Notes Review any journal entries, meeting notes, or 
miscellaneous notes scribbled on notebook paper. Li st action 
items, projects, waiting-fors, calendar events, and  someday/ 
maybes, as appropriate. File any reference notes an d materials. 
Stage your "Read/Renew" material. Be ruthless with yourself, 
185 You will invariably 
take in more 
opportunities than 
your system can 
process on a daily 
basis.
186 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWO 
processing all notes and thoughts relative to inter actions, projects, 
new initiatives, and input that have come your way since your last 
download, and purging those not needed. 
Previous Calendar Data Review past calendar dates in detail for 
remaining action items, reference information, and so on, and 
transfer that data into the active system. Be able to archive your 
last week's calendar with nothing left uncaptured. 
Upcoming Calendar Look at future calendar events (long- and 
short-term). Capture actions about arrangements and  prepara- 
tions for any upcoming events. 
Empty Your Head Put in writing (in appropriate categories) any 
new projects, action items, waiting-fors, someday/m aybes, and so 
forth that you haven't yet captured. 
Review "Projects" (and Larger Outcome) Lists Evaluate the status 
of projects, goals, and outcomes one by one, ensuri ng that at least 
one current kick-start action for each is in your s ystem. 
Review "Next Actions"Lists Mark off completed actions. Review 
for reminders of further action steps to capture. 
Review "Waiting For" List Record appropriate actions for any 
needed follow-up. Check off received items. 
Review Any Relevant Checklists Is there anything you haven't 
done that you need to do? 
Review "Someday/Maybe" List Check for any projects that may 
have become active and transfer them to "Projects."  Delete items 
no longer of interest. 
CHAPTER 8  |  REVIEWING: KEEPING YOUR SYSTEM FUNCTIONAL 
Review "Pending" and Support Files Browse through all work- 
in-progress support material to trigger new actions , completions, 
and waiting-fors. 
Be Creative and Courageous Are there any new, wonderful, hare- 
brained, creative, thought-provoking, risk-taking i deas you can 
add to your system? 
This review process is common sense, but few 
of us do it as well as we could, and that means as 
regularly as we should to keep a clear mind and a 
sense of relaxed control. 
The Right Time and Place for the Review 
The Weekly Review is so critical that it behooves y ou 
to establish good habits, environments, and tools t o 
support it. Once your comfort zone has been estab- 
lished for the kind of relaxed control that Getting 
Things Done is all about, you won't have to worry too 
much about making yourself do your review—you'll 
have to to get back to your personal standards again. 
Until then, do whatever you need to, once a 
week, to trick yourself into backing away from the 
daily grind for a couple of hours—not to zone out, 
but to rise up at least to "10,000 feet" and catch up. 
If you have the luxury of an office or work space 
that can be somewhat isolated from the people and i nteractions of 
the day, and if you have anything resembling a typi cal Monday- 
to-Friday workweek, I recommend that you block out two hours 
early every Friday afternoon for the review. Three factors make 
this an ideal time: 
• The events of the week are likely to be still fre sh enough for you 
to be able to do a complete postmortem ("Oh, yeah, I need to 
make sure I get back to her about..."). 
187 "Point of view" 
is that qulnt- 
essentially human 
solution to 
information 
overload, an 
intuitive process of 
reducing things to 
an essential 
relevant and 
manageable 
minimum. . . . In 
a world of 
hyperabundant 
content, point of 
view will become 
the scarcest of 
resources. 
—Paul 
188 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWO 
•When you (invariably) uncover actions that require  reaching 
people at work, you'll still have time to do that b efore they leave 
for the weekend. 
• It's great to clear your psychic decks so you can  go into the 
weekend ready for refreshment and recreation, with nothing on 
your mind. 
You may be the kind of person, however, who doesn't  have 
normal weekends. I, for example, often have as much  to do on 
Saturday and Sunday as on Wednesday. But I do have the 
luxury(?) of frequent long plane trips, which provi de an ideal 
opportunity for me to catch up. A good friend and c lient of mine, 
an executive in the world's largest aerospace compa ny, has his own 
Sunday-night ritual of relaxing in his home office and processing 
the hundreds of notes he's generated during his wee k of back-to- 
back meetings. 
Whatever your life-style, you need a weekly regroup ing 
ritual. You likely have something like this (or clo se to it) already. If 
so, leverage the habit by adding into it a higher-a ltitude review 
process. 
The people who find it hardest to make time for thi s review 
are those who have constantly on-demand work and ho me envi- 
ronments, with zero built-in time or space for regr ouping. The 
most stressed professionals I have met are the ones  who have to be 
mission-critically reactive at work (e.g., high-lev el equities traders 
and chiefs of staff) and then go home to a couple o f under-ten- 
year-old children and a spouse who also works. The more fortunate 
of them have a one-hour train commute. 
If you recognize yourself in that picture, your gre atest chal- 
lenge will be to build in a consistent process of r egrouping, when 
your world is not directly in your face. You'll nee d to either accept 
the requirement of an after-hours time at your desk  on a Friday 
night or establish a relaxed but at-work kind of lo cation and time 
at home. 
CHAPTER 8  I  REVIEWING: KEEPING YOUR SYSTEM FUNCTIONAL 
Executive Operational Review Time I've coached many execu- 
tives to block out two hours on their calendars on Fridays. For 
them the biggest problem is how to balance quality thinking and 
catch-up time with the urgent demands of mission-cr itical inter- 
actions. This is a tough call. The most senior and savvy of them, 
however, know the value of sacrificing the seemingl y 
urgent for the truly important, and they create the ir 
islands of time for some version of this process. 
Even the executives who have integrated a con- 
sistent reflective time for their work, though, oft en 
seem to give short shrift to the more mundane revie w 
and catch-up process at the "10,000-foot" level. Be tween wall-to- 
wall meetings and ambling around your koi pond with  a chardon- 
nay at sunset, there's got to be a slightly elevate d level of reflection 
and regrouping required for operational control and
focus. If you think you have all your open loops fu lly 
identified, clarified, assessed, and actionalized, you're 
probably kidding yourself. 
The "Bigger Picture" Reviews 
Yes, at some point you must clarify the larger out-
comes, the long-term goals, the visions and princi-
ples that ultimately drive and test your decisions.
What are your key goals and objectives in your 
work? What should you have in place a year or three
years from now? How is your career going? Is this t he 
life-style that is most fulfilling to you? Are you doing 
what you really want or need to do, from a deeper 
and longer-term perspective? 
The explicit focus of this book is not at those 
"30,000-" to "50,000+-foot" levels. Urging you to 
operate from a higher perspective is, however, its 
implicit purpose—to assist you in making your total 
189 Your best thoughts 
about work won't 
happen while you're 
at work. 
Thinking is the 
very essence of and 
the most difficult 
thing to do in, 
business and in 
life. Empire 
builders spend 
hour-after-hour on 
mental work. . . 
while others party. 
If you're not con- 
sciously aware of 
putting forth the 
effort to exert self- 
guided integrated 
thinking . . . then 
you're giving in to 
laziness and no 
longer control your 
life. 
—David Kekich 
190 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO 
life expression more fulfilling and better aligned with the bigger 
game we're all about. As you increase the speed and  agility with 
which you clear the "runway" and "10,000-foot" leve ls of your life 
and work, be sure to revisit the other levels you'r e engaged in, now 
and then, to maintain a truly clear head. 
How often you ought to challenge yourself with that  type of 
wide-ranging review is something only you can know.  The princi- 
ple I must affirm at this juncture is this: 
You need to assess your life and work at the approp riate hori- 
zons, making the appropriate decisions, at the appr opriate intervals, 
in order to really come clean. 
Which brings us to the ultimate point and challenge  of all this 
personal collecting, processing, organizing, and re viewing method- 
ology: It's 9:22 A.M. Wednesday morning—what do you do? 
Doing: Making the 
Best Action Choices 
WHEN IT COMES to your real-time, plow-through, get- it-done work- 
day, how do you decide what to do at any given poin t? 
As I've said, my simple answer is, trust your 
heart. Or your spirit. Or, if you're allergic to th ose 
kinds of words, try these: your gut, the seat of yo ur 
pants, your intuition. 
That doesn't mean you throw your life to the 
winds—unless, of course, it does. I actually went 
down that route myself with some vengeance at one 
point in my life, and I can attest that the lessons  were 
valuable, if not necessarily necessary.* 
As outlined in chapter 2 (pages 48-53), I have 
found three priority frameworks to be enormously he lpful in the 
context of deciding actions: 
• The four-criteria model for choosing actions in the  moment 
• The threefold model for evaluating daily work 
• The six-level model for reviewing your own work 
*There are various ways to give it all up. You can ignore the physical world and 
its realities and trust in the universe. I did that , and it was a powerful experi- 
ence. And one I wouldn't wish on anyone. Surrenderi ng to your inner aware- 
ness, however, and its intelligence and practicalit y in the worlds you live in, is 
the higher ground. Trusting yourself and the source  of your intelligence is a 
more elegant version of freedom and personal produc tivity. 
191 Ultimately and 
always you must
trust your intuition.
There are many 
things you can do,
however, that can 
increase that trust.
192 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
These happen to be shown in reverse hierarchical or der—
that is, the reverse of the typical strategic top-d own perspective. 
In keeping with the nature of the Getting Things Done method- 
ology, I have found it useful to once again work fr om the bottom, 
up, meaning I'll start with the most mundane levels . 
The Four-Criteria Model for 
Choosing Actions in the Moment 
Remember that you make your action choices based on  the fol- 
lowing four criteria, in order: 
1 | Context 
2 | Time available 
3 | Energy available 
4 | Priority 
Let's examine each of these in the light of how you  can best 
structure your systems and behaviors to take advant age of its 
dynamics. 
Context 
At any point in time, the first thing to consider i s, what could you 
possibly do, where you are, with the tools you have ? Do you have a 
phone? Do you have access to the person you need to  talk with 
face-to-face about three agenda items? Are you at t he store where 
you need to buy something? If you can't do the acti on because 
you're not in the appropriate location or don't hav e the appropri- 
ate tool, don't worry about it. 
As I've said, you should always organize your actio n 
reminders by context—"Calls," "At Home," "At Comput er," 
"Errands," "Agenda for Joe," "Agenda for Staff Meet ing," and 
so on. Since context is the first criterion that co mes into play in 
your choice of actions, context-sorted lists preven t unnecessary 
CHAPTER 9  |  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES 
reassessments about what to do. If you have a bunch  of things to 
do on one to-do list, but you actually can't do man y of them in the 
same context, you force yourself to continually kee p reconsidering 
all of them. 
If you're stuck in traffic, and the only actions yo u can take are 
calls on your cell phone, you want to be able to pu ll out just your 
"Calls" list. Your action lists should fold in or o ut, based on what 
you could possibly do at any time. 
A second real benefit accrues from organizing all y our 
actions by the physical context needed: that in itself forces you to 
make the all-important determination about the next  physical 
action on your stuff. All of my action lists are se t up this way, so I 
have to decide on the very next physical action bef ore I can know 
which list to put an item on (is this something tha t requires the 
computer? a phone? being in a store?). People who g ive them- 
selves a "Misc." action list (i.e., one not specifi c to a context) often 
let themselves slide in the next-action decision, t oo. 
I frequently encourage clients to structure their l ist catego- 
ries early on as they're processing their in-basket s, because that 
automatically grounds their projects in the real th ings that need to 
get done to get them moving. 
Time Available 
The second factor in choosing an action is how much  time you 
have before you have to do something else. If your meeting is 
starting in ten minutes, you'll most likely select a different action 
to do right now than you would if the next couple o f hours were 
clear. 
Obviously, it's good to know how much time you have  at 
hand (hence the emphasis on calendar and watch). A total-life 
action-reminder inventory will give you maximum inf ormation 
about what you need to do, and make it much easier to match 
your actions to the windows you have. In other word s, if you have 
ten minutes before that next meeting, find a ten-mi nute thing to 
do. If your lists have only the "big" or "important " things on them, 
193 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWO 
no item listed may be possible to handle in a ten-m inute period. If 
you're going to have to do those shorter action thi ngs anyway, the 
most productive way to get them done is to utilize the little "weird 
time" windows that occur throughout the day. 
Energy Available 
Although you can increase your energy level at time s 
by changing your context and redirecting your focus , 
you can do only so much. The tail end of a day take n 
up mostly by a marathon budget-planning session is 
probably not the best time to call a prospective cl ient 
or start drafting a performance-review policy. It 
might be better to call the airline to change a res erva- 
tion, process some expense receipts, or skim a trad e 
journal. 
Just as having all your next-action options availab le allows 
you to take advantage of various time slots, knowin g about every- 
thing you're going to need to process and do at som e point 
will allow you to match productive activity with yo ur vitality 
level. 
I recommend that you always keep an inventory of th ings 
that need to be done that require very little menta l or creative 
horsepower. When you're in one of those low-energy states, 
do them. Casual reading (magazines, articles, and c atalogs), 
telephone/address data that need to be inputted ont o your com- 
puter, file purging, backing up your laptop, even j ust watering 
your plants and filling your stapler—these are some  of the myriad 
things that you've got to deal with sometime anyway . 
This is one of the best reasons for having very 
clean edges to your personal management system: it 
makes it easy to continue doing productive activity
when you're not in top form. If you're in a low-ene rgy 
mode and your reading material is disorganized, you r 
receipts are all over the place, your filing system  is 
chaotic, and your in-basket is dysfunctional, it ju st 
194 We all have times 
•when we think 
more effectively, 
and times when 
we should not be 
thinking at all. 
—Daniel Cohen 
There is no reason 
not to be highly 
productive, even 
when you're not in 
top form. 
CHAPTER 9  |  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES 
seems like too much work to do to find and organize  the tasks at 
hand; so you simply avoid doing anything at all and  then you feel 
even worse. One of the best ways to increase your energy is to 
close some of your loops. So always be sure to have  some easy 
loops to close, right at hand. 
These first three criteria for choosing action (con text, time, and 
energy) bespeak the need for a complete next-action  reminder 
system. Sometimes you won't be in a mode to do that  kind of 
■ thinking; it needs to have already been done. If i t is, you can oper- 
ate much more "in your zone" and choose from deline ated actions 
that fit the situation. 
Priority 
Given the context you're in and the time and energy  you have, the 
obvious next criterion for action choice is relativ e priority: "Out of 
all my remaining options, what is the most importan t thing for 
me to do?" 
"How do I decide my priorities?" is a question I 
frequently hear from people I'm working with. It 
springs from their experience of having more on the ir 
plate to do than they can comfortably handle. They 
know that some hard choices have to be made, and 
that some things may not get done at all. 
At the end of the day, in order to feel good about 
what you didn't get done, you must have made some c onscious 
decisions about your responsibilities, goals, and v alues. That 
process invariably includes an often complex interp lay with the 
goals, values, and directions of your organization and of the other 
significant people in your life, and with the impor tance of those 
relationships to you. 
195 It is impossible to 
feel good about
your choices unless 
you are clear about
what your work 
really is.
196 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWO 
The Threefold Model for 
Evaluating Daily Work 
Setting priorities assumes that some things will be  more important 
than others, but important relative to what? In thi s context, the 
answer is, to your work—that is, the job you have a ccepted from 
yourself and/or from others. This is where the next  two frameworks 
need to be brought to bear in your thinking. They'r e about defining 
your work. Keep in mind that though much of this me thodology 
will be within the arena of your professional focus , I'm using "work" 
in the universal sense, to mean anything you have a  commitment to 
making happen, personally as well as professionally . 
These days, daily work activity itself presents a r elatively new 
type of challenge to most professionals, something that it's help- 
ful to understand as we endeavor to build the most productive 
systems. As I explained earlier, during the course of the workday, 
at any point in time, you'll be engaged in one of t hree types of 
activities: 
• Doing predefined work 
• Doing work as it shows up 
• Defining your work 
You may be doing things on your action lists, doing  things as 
they come up, or processing incoming inputs to dete rmine what 
work that needs to be done, either then or later, f rom your lists. 
This is common sense. But many people let themselve s get 
wrapped around the second activity—dealing with thi ngs that 
show up ad hoc—much too easily, and let the other t wo slide, to 
their detriment. 
Let's say it's 10:26 A.M. Monday, and you're in your office. 
You've just ended a half-hour unexpected phone call  with a 
prospective client. You have three pages of scribbl ed notes from 
the conversation. There's a meeting scheduled with your staff at 
CHAPTER 9  |  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES 
eleven, about half an hour from now. You were out l ate last night 
with your spouse's parents and are still a little f rayed around the 
edges (you told your father-in-law you'd get back t o him about. . . 
what?). Your assistant just laid six telephone mess ages in front of 
you. You have a major strategic-planning session co ming up in 
two days, for which you have yet to formulate your ideas. The oil 
light in your car came on as you drove to work this  morning. And 
your boss hinted as you passed her earlier in the h all that she'd like 
your thoughts on the memo she e-mailed you yesterda y, before 
this afternoon's three o'clock meeting. 
Are your systems set up to maximally support 
dealing with this reality, at 10:26 on Monday morn-
ing? If you're still keeping things in your head, a nd if 
you're still trying to capture only the "critical" stuff on 
your lists, I suggest that the answer is no. 
I've noticed that people are actually more com- 
fortable dealing with surprises and crises than the y 
are taking control of processing, organizing, revie w- 
ing, and assessing that part of their work that is not as 
self-evident. It's easy to get sucked into "busy" a nd 
"urgent" mode, especially when you have a lot of un processed and 
relatively out-of-control work on your desk, in you r e-mail, and 
on your mind. 
In fact, much of our life and work just shows up in  the 
moment, and it usually becomes the priority when it  does. It's 
indeed true for most professionals that the nature of their job 
requires them to be instantly available to handle n ew work as 
it appears in many forms. For instance, you need to  pay atten- 
tion to your boss when he shows up and wants a few minutes 
of your time. You get a request from a senior execu tive that sud- 
denly takes precedence over anything else you thoug ht you 
needed to do today. You find out about a serious pr oblem with ful- 
filling a major customer's order, and you have to t ake care of it 
right away. 
These are all understandable judgment calls. But th e angst 
197 It is often easier to 
get wrapped up in 
the urgent demands 
of the moment than 
to deal with your in- 
basket, e-mail, and 
the rest of your 
open loops.
198 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
begins to mount when the other actions on your list s are not 
reviewed and renegotiated by you or between you and  everyone 
else. The constant sacrifices of not doing the work  you have 
defined on your lists can be tolerated only if you know what you're 
not doing. That requires regular processing of your  in-basket 
(defining your work) and consistent review of compl ete lists of all 
your predetermined work. 
If choosing to do work that just showed up instead of doing 
work you predefined is a conscious choice, based on  your best call, 
that's playing the game the best way you can. Most people, how- 
ever, have major improvements to make in how they c larify, man- 
age, and renegotiate their total inventory of proje cts and actions. If 
you let yourself get caught up in the urgencies of the moment, 
without feeling comfortable about what you're not dealing with, 
the result is frustration and anxiety. Too often th e stress and 
lowered effectiveness are blamed on the "surprises. " If you know 
what you're doing, and what you're not doing, surprises are just 
another opportunity to be creative and excel. 
In addition, when the in-basket and the action list s get 
ignored for too long, random things lying in them t end to surface 
as emergencies later on, adding more ad hoc work-as -it-shows-up 
to fuel the fire. 
Many people use the inevitablity of an almost infin ite stream 
of immediately evident things to do as a way to avo id the respon- 
sibilities of defining their work and managing thei r total inven- 
tory. It's easy to get seduced into not-quite-so-cr itical stuff that is 
right at hand, especially if your in-basket and you r personal orga- 
nization are out of control. Too often "managing by  wandering 
around" is an excuse for getting away from amorphou s piles of 
stuff. 
This is where the need for knowledge-work athletics  really 
shows up. Most people did not grow up in a world wh ere defining 
the edges of work and managing huge numbers of open  loops were 
required. But when you've developed the skill and, habits of pro- 
cessing input rapidly into a rigorously defined sys tem, it becomes 
CHAPTER 9  I  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES 
much easier to trust your judgment calls about the dance of what 
to do, what to stop doing, and what to do instead. 
The Moment-to-Moment Balancing Act 
At the black-belt level, you can shift like lightni ng from one foot 
to the other and back again. While you're processin g your in- 
basket, for example, your assistant comes in to tel l 
you about a situation that needs immediate atten- 
tion. No sweat—your tray is still there, with every - 
thing still to be processed in one stack, ready to be 
picked up again when you can get back to it. While 
you're on hold on the phone, you can be reviewing 
your action lists and getting a sense of what you'r e 
going to do when the call is done. While you wait f or 
a meeting to start, you can work down the "Read/ 
Review" stack you've brought with you. And when 
the conversation you weren't expecting with your 
boss shrinks the time you have before your next 
meeting to twelve minutes, you can easily find a wa y 
to use that window to good advantage. 
You can do only one of these work activities at a t ime. If you 
stop to talk to someone in his or her office, you'r e not working off 
your lists or processing incoming stuff. The challe nge is to feel 
confident about what you have decided to do. 
So how do you decide? This again will involve your intuitive 
judgments—how important is the unexpected work, aga inst all 
the rest? How long can you let your in-basket go un processed and 
all your stuff unreviewed and trust that you're mak ing good deci- 
sions about what to do? 
People often complain about the interruptions that prevent 
them from doing their work. But interruptions are u navoidable in 
life. When you become elegant at dispatching what's  coming in 
and are organized enough to take advantage of the " weird time" 
windows that show up, you can switch between one ta sk and the 
other rapidly. You can be processing e-mails while you're on hold 
199 To ignore the 
unexpected (even if 
it were possible) 
would be to live 
without 
opportunity, 
spontaneity, and 
the rich moments 
of which "life" is 
made. 
—Stephen Covey