Getting Projects Creatively 
Under Way: The Five Phases of 
Project Planning 
You've got to think 
about the big 
things while you're 
doing small things, 
so that all the 
small things go in 
the right direction. 
—Alvin Toffler THE KEY INGREDIENTS of relaxed control are (1) clea rly 
defined outcomes (projects) and the next actions 
required to move them toward closure, and (2) re- 
minders placed in a trusted system that is reviewed
regularly. This is what I call horizontal focus. Al - 
though it may seem simple, the actual application o f 
the process can create profound results. 
Enhancing "Vertical" Focus 
Horizontal focus is all you'll need in most situati ons, most of the 
time. Sometimes, however, you may need greater rigo r and focus 
to get a project under control, to identify a solut ion, 
or to ensure that all the right steps have been det er- 
mined. This is where vertical focus comes in. Know-
ing how to think productively in this more "vertica l" 
way and how to integrate the results into your per-
sonal system is the second powerful behavior set 
needed for knowledge work. 
This kind of thinking doesn't have to be elabo- 
rate. Most of the thinking you'll need to do is inf or- 
mal, what I call back-of-the-envelope planning—the kind of 
thing you do literally on the back of an envelope i n a coffee shop 
with a colleague as you're hashing out the agenda a nd structure of 
54 
The goal is to get 
projects and 
situations off your 
mind, but not to 
lose any potentially 
useful ideas. 
CHAPTER 3  |  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING 
a sales presentation. In my experience this tends t o be the most 
productive kind of planning you can do in terms of your output 
relative to the energy you put into it. True, every  once in a while 
you may need to develop a more formal structure or plan to clarify 
components, sequences, or priorities. And more deta iled outlines 
will also be necessary to coordinate more complex s ituations—if 
teams need to collaborate about various project pie ces, for exam- 
ple, or if business plans need to be drafted to con vince an investor 
you know what you're doing. But as a general rule, you can be 
pretty creative with nothing more than an envelope and a pencil. 
The greatest need I've seen in project thinking in the profes- 
sional world is not for more formal models; usually  the people 
who need those models already have them or can get them as part 
of an academic or professional curriculum. Instead,  I've found 
the biggest gap to be the lack of a project-focusin g model for 
"the rest of us." We need ways to validate and supp ort our think- 
ing, no matter how informal. Formal planning sessio ns and high- 
horsepower planning tools (such as project software ) can certainly 
be useful, but too often the participants in a meet ing will need to 
have another meeting—a back-of-the-envelope session—to 
actu- 
ally get a piece of work fleshed out and under cont rol. More for- 
mal and structured meetings also tend to skip over at least one 
critical issue, such as why the project is being done in the first 
place. Or they don't allow adequate time for brains torming, the 
development of a bunch of ideas nobody's ever thoug ht about that 
would make the project more interesting, more profi table, or just 
more fun. And finally, very few such meetings bring  to bear suffi- 
cient rigor in determining action steps and account abilities for the 
various aspects of a project plan. 
The good news is, there is a productive way to think about 
projects, situations, and topics that creates maxim um value with 
minimal expenditure of time and effort. It happens to be the way 
we naturally think and plan, though not necessarily the way we 
normally plan when we consciously try to get a project under  con- 
trol. In my experience, when people do more plannin g, more 
55 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE 
informally and naturally, they relieve a great deal  of stress and 
obtain better results. 
The Natural Planning Model 
You're already familiar with the most brilliant and  creative plan- 
ner in the world: your brain. You yourself are actu ally a planning 
machine. You're planning when you get dressed, eat 
lunch, go to the store, or simply talk. Although th e 
process may seem somewhat random, a quite com- 
plex series of steps in fact has to occur before yo ur 
brain can make anything happen physically. Your 
mind goes through five steps to accomplish virtuall y 
any task: 
56 1 | Defining purpose and principles 
2 | Outcome visioning 
3 | Brainstorming 
4 | Organizing 
5 | Identifying next actions 
A Simple Example: Planning Dinner Out 
The last time you went out to dinner, what initiall y caused you to 
think about doing it? It could have been any number  of things—
the desire to satisfy hunger, socialize with friend s, celebrate a spe- 
cial occasion, sign a business deal, or develop a r omance. As soon 
as any of these turned into a real inclination that  you wanted to 
move on, you started planning. Your intention was y our purpose, 
and it automatically triggered your internal planni ng process. 
Your principles created the boundaries of your plan. You probably 
didn't consciously think about your principles regarding going out 
to dinner, but you thought within them: standards of food and 
service, affordability, convenience, and comfort al l may have The most 
experienced planner 
in the world is your 
brain. 
CHAPTER 3  I  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING 
played a part. In any case, your purpose and princi ples were the 
defining impetus and boundaries of your planning. 
Once you decided to fulfill your purpose, what were  your 
first substantive thoughts? Probably not "point II. A.3.b. in plan." 
Your first ideas were more likely things like "Ital ian food at Gio- 
vanni's," or "Sitting at a sidewalk table at the Bi stro Cafe." You 
probably also imagined some positive picture of wha t you might 
experience or how the evening would turn out—maybe the peo- 
ple involved, the atmosphere, and/or the outcome. T hat was your 
outcome visioning. Whereas your purpose was the why of your 
going out to dinner, your vision was an image of th e what —of the 
physical world's looking, sounding, and feeling the  ways that best 
fulfilled your purpose. 
Once you'd identified with your vision, what did yo ur mind 
naturally begin doing? What did it start to think a bout? "What 
time should we go?" "Is it open tonight?" "Will it be crowded?" 
"What's the weather like?" "Should we change clothe s?" "Is there 
gas in the car?" "How hungry are we?" That was brainstorming. 
Those questions were part of the naturally creative  process that 
happens once you commit to some outcome that hasn't  happened 
yet. Your brain noticed a gap between what you were  looking 
toward and where you actually were at the time, and  it began to 
resolve that "cognitive dissonance" by trying to fi ll in the blanks. 
This is the beginning of the "how" phase of natural  planning. But 
it did the thinking in a somewhat random and ad hoc  fashion. 
Lots of different aspects of going to dinner just o ccurred to you. 
You almost certainly didn't need to actually write all of them 
down on a piece of paper, but you did a version of that process in 
your mind.* 
Once you had generated a sufficient number of ideas  and 
details, you couldn't help but start to organize them. You may 
*If, however, you were handling the celebration for  your best friend's recent tri- 
umph, the complexity and detail that might accrue i n your head should warrant 
at least the back of an envelope! 
57 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE 
have thought or said, "First we need to find out if  the restaurant is 
open", or "Let's call the Andersons and see if they 'd like to go out 
with us." Once you've generated various thoughts re levant to the 
outcome, your mind will automatically begin to sort  them by 
components (subprojects), priorities, and/or sequen ces of events. 
Components would be: "We need to handle logistics, people, and
location." Priorities would be: "It's critical to find out if the client 
really would like to go to dinner." Sequences would be: "First we 
need to check whether the restaurant is open, then call the 
Andersons, then get dressed." 
Finally (assuming that you're really committed to t he project—
in this case, going out to dinner), you focus on th e next action that 
you need to take to make the first component actual ly happen. "Call 
Suzanne's to see if it's open, and make the reserva tion." 
These five phases of project planning occur natural ly for 
everything you accomplish during the day. It's how you create 
things—dinner, a relaxing evening, a new product, o r a new com- 
pany. You have an urge to make something happen; yo u image the 
outcome; you generate ideas that might be relevant;  you sort those 
into a structure; and you define a physical activit y that would 
begin to make it a reality. And you do all of that naturally, without 
giving it much thought. 
Natural Planning Is Not Necessarily Normal 
But is the process described above the way your com mittee is 
planning the church retreat? Is it how your IT team  is approach- 
ing the new system installation? Is it how you're o rganizing the 
wedding or thinking through the potential merger? 
Have you clarified the primary purpose of the proje ct and com- 
municated it to everyone who ought to know it? And have you 
agreed on the standards and behaviors you'll need t o 
adhere to to make it successful? 
Have you envisioned success and considered 
all the innovative things that might result if you 
achieved it? 
58 Have you 
envisioned wild 
success lately? 
CHAPTER 3  |  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING 
Have you gotten all possible ideas out on the table —
everything you need to take into consideration that  might affect 
the outcome? 
Have you identified the mission-critical components , key 
milestones, and deliverables? 
Have you defined all the aspects of the project tha t could be 
moved on right now, what the next action is for eac h part, and 
who's responsible for what? 
If you're like most people I interact with in a coa ching or 
consulting capacity, the collective answer to these  questions is, 
probably not. There are likely to be at least some components of 
the natural planning model that you haven't impleme nted. 
In some of my seminars I get participants to actual ly plan a 
current strategic project that uses this model. In only a few minutes 
they walk themselves through all five phases, and u sually end up 
being amazed at how much progress they've made comp ared with 
what they have tried to do in the past. One gentlem an came up 
afterward and told me, "I don't know whether I shou ld thank you or 
be angry. I just finished a business plan I've been  telling myself 
would take months, and now I have no excuses for no t doing it!" 
You can try it for yourself right now if you like. Choose one 
project that is new or stuck or that could simply u se some 
improvement. Think of your purpose. Think of what a  successful 
outcome would look like: where would you be physica lly, finan- 
cially, in terms of reputation, or whatever? Brains torm potential 
steps. Organize your ideas. Decide on the next acti ons. Are you 
any clearer about where you want to go and how to g et there? 
The Unnatural Planning Model 
To emphasize the importance of utilizing the natura l planning 
model for the more complex things we're involved wi th, let's con- 
trast it with the more "normal" model used in most 
environments—
what I call unnatural planning. 
59 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE 
When the "Good Idea" Is a Bad Idea 
Have you ever heard a well-intentioned manager star t a meeting 
with the question, "OK, so who's got a good idea ab out this?" 
What is the assumption here? Before any evaluation of 
what's a "good idea" can be trusted, the purpose mu st 
be clear, the vision must be well defined, and all the 
relevant data must have been collected (brain- 
stormed) and analyzed (organized). "What's a good 
idea?" is a good question, but only when you're abo ut 
80 percent of the way through your thinking! Start- 
ing there would probably blow anyone's creative 
mental fuses. 
Trying to approach any situation from a perspective  that is not 
the natural way your mind operates will be difficul t. People do it all 
the time, but it almost always engenders a lack of clarity and 
increased stress. In interactions with others, it o pens the door for 
egos, politics, and hidden agendas to take over the  discussion (gen- 
erally speaking, the most verbally aggressive will run the show). 
And if it's just you, attempting to come up with a "good idea" before 
defining your purpose, creating a vision, and colle cting lots of initial 
bad ideas is likely to give you a case of creative constipation. 
Let's Blame Mrs. Williams 
If you're like most people in our culture, the only  formal training 
you've ever had in planning and organizing proactiv ely was in the 
fourth or fifth grade. And even if that wasn't the only education 
you've had in this area, it was probably the most e motionally 
intense (meaning it sank in the deepest). 
Mrs. Williams, my fourth-grade teacher, had to 
teach us about organizing our thinking (it was in h er 
lesson plans). We were going to learn to write reports. 
But in order to write a well-organized, successful 
report, what did we have to write first? That's rig ht—
an outline! 
60 If you're waiting to 
have a good idea 
before you have any 
ideas, you won't 
have many ideas. 
Outlines were easy, 
as long as you 
wrote the report 
first. 
CHAPTER 3  |  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING 
Did you ever have to do that, create an outline to begin with? 
Did you ever stare at a Roman numeral I at the top of your page 
for a torturous period of time and decide that plan ning and orga- 
nizing ahead of time were for people very different  from you? 
Probably. 
In the end, I did learn to write outlines. I just w rote the 
report first, then made up an outline from the repo rt, after the 
fact. 
That's what most people learned about planning from  our 
educational system. And I still see outlines done a fter the fact, just 
to please the authorities. In the business world, t hey're often 
headed "Goals" and "Objectives." But they still hav e very little to 
do with what people are doing or what they're inspi red about. 
These documents are sitting in drawers and in e-mai ls some- 
where, bearing little relationship to operational r eality. 
The Reactive Planning Model 
The unnatural planning model is what most people co nsciously 
think of as "planning," and because it's so often a rtificial and 
irrelevant to real work, people just don't plan. At  least not on the 
front end: they resist planning meetings, presentat ions, and 
strategic operations until the last minute. 
But what happens if you don't plan ahead of 
time? In many cases, crisis! ("Didn't you get the t ick- 
ets? I thought you were going to do that?!") Then, 
when the urgency of the last minute is upon you, th e 
reactive planning model ensues. 
What's the first level of focus when the stuff 
hits the fan? Action! Work harder! Overtime! More people! Get 
busier! And a lot of stressed-out people are thrown  at the situa- 
tion. 
Then, when having a lot of busy people banging into
each other doesn't resolve the situation, someone g ets more 
61 When you find 
yourself in a hole, 
stop digging. 
—Will 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE 
sophisticated and says, "We need to get organized!" (Catching on 
now?) Then people draw boxes around the problem and  label 
them. Or redraw the boxes and relabel them. 
At some point they realize that just redrawing 
boxes isn't really doing much to solve the problem.
Now someone (much more sophisticated) suggests 
that more creativity is needed. "Let's brainstorm!" 
With everyone in the room, the boss asks, "So, who' s 
got a good idea here?" (Thank you, Mrs. Williams.) 
When not much happens, the boss may surmise that hi s staff 
has used up most of its internal creativity. Time t o hire a consul- 
tant! Of course, if the consultant is worth his sal t, at some point 
he is probably going to ask the big question: "So, what are you 
really trying to do here, anyway?" (vision,purpose). 
The reactive style is the reverse of the natural model. It will 
always come back to a top-down focus. It's not a ma tter of 
whether the natural planning will be done—just when, and at 
what cost. 
62 Natural Planning Techniques: The Five Phases 
It goes without saying, but still it must be said a gain: thinking in 
more effective ways about projects and situations c an make things 
happen sooner, better, and more successfully. So if  our minds plan 
naturally anyway, what can we learn from that? How can we use 
that model to facilitate getting more and better re sults in our 
thinking? 
Let's examine each of the five phases of natural pl anning and 
see how we can leverage these contexts. 
Purpose 
It never hurts to ask the "why?" question. Almost a nything you're 
currently doing can be enhanced and even galvanized  by more Don't just do 
something. Stand 
there. 
—Rochelle Myer 
CHAPTER 3  I  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING 
scrutiny at this top level of focus. Why are you go ing 
to your next meeting? What's the purpose of your 
task? Why are you having friends over for a barbequ e 
in the backyard? Why are you hiring a marketing 
director? Why do you have a budget? 
I admit it: this is nothing but advanced common 
sense. To know and to be clear about the purpose of
any activity are prime directives for clarity, crea tive 
development,  and cooperation.  But it's common 
sense that's not commonly practiced, simply because  it's so easy 
for us to create things, get caught up in the form of what we've 
created, and let our connection with our real and p rimary inten- 
tions slip. 
I know, based upon thousands of hours spent in many  offices 
with many sophisticated people, that the "why?" que stion cannot 
be ignored. When people complain to me about having  too many 
meetings, I have to ask, "What is the purpose of th e meetings?" 
When they ask, "Who should I invite to the planning  session?" I 
have to ask, "What's the purpose of the planning se ssion?" Until 
we have the answer to my questions, there's no possible way to 
come up with an appropriate response to theirs. 
The Value of Thinking About "Why" 
Here are just some of the benefits of asking "why?" : 
• It defines success. 
• It creates decision-making criteria. 
• It aligns resources. 
• It motivates. 
• It clarifies focus. 
• It expands options. 
Let's take a closer look at each of these in turn. People love to win.
If you're not totally 
clear about the 
purpose of what
you're doing, you 
have no chance of
winning.
63 Fanaticism 
consists of 
redoubling your 
efforts when you 
have forgotten 
your aim. 
—
George 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE 
about the purpose of what you're doing, you have no
chance of winning. Purpose defines success. It's th e 
primal reference point for any investment of time 
and energy, from deciding to run for elective offic e to 
designing a form. 
Ultimately you can't feel good about a staff 
meeting unless you know what the purpose of the 
meeting was. And if you want to sleep well, you'd b etter have a 
good answer when your board asks why you fired your  V.P. of 
marketing or hired that hotshot M.B.A. as your new finance 
director. You won't really know whether or not your  business plan 
is any good until you hold it up against the succes s criterion that 
you define by answering the question "Why do we nee d a business 
plan?" 
It Creates Decision-Making Criteria How do you decide whether 
to spend the money for a five-color brochure or jus t 
go with a two-color? How do you know whether it's 
worth hiring a major Web design firm to handle your
new Web site? 
It all comes down to purpose. Given what you're 
trying to accomplish, are these resource investment s 
required, and if so, which ones? There's no way to 
know until the purpose is clarified. 
It Aligns Resources How should we spend our staffing allocation 
in the corporate budget? How do we best use the cas h flow right 
now to maximize our viability as a retailer over th e next year? 
Should we spend more money on the luncheon or the s peakers for 
the monthly association meeting? 
In each case, the answer depends on what we're real ly trying 
to accomplish—the why. 
64 It Defines Success    People are starved for "wins" these days. We 
love to play games, and we like to win, or at least  be in a position 
where we could win. And if you're not totally clear Celebrate any 
progress. Don't 
•wait to get perfect. 
—Ann McGee 
Cooper 
Often the only way 
to make a hard 
decision is to come 
back to the 
purpose. 
CHAPTER 3  |  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING 
It Motivates Let's face it: if there's no good reason to be doing 
something, it's not worth doing. I'm often stunned by how many 
people have forgotten why they're doing what they're doing—and 
by how quickly a simple question like "Why are you doing that?" 
can get them back on track. 
It Clarifies Focus When you land on the real purpose for any- 
thing you're doing, it makes things clearer. Just t aking two min- 
utes and writing out your primary reason for doing something 
invariably creates an increased sharpness of vision , much like 
bringing a telescope into focus. Frequently, projec ts and situations 
that have begun to feel scattered and blurred grow clearer when 
someone brings it back home by asking, "What are we  really try- 
ing to accomplish here?" 
It  Expands Options    Paradoxically, even as purpose brings things 
into pinpoint focus, it opens up creative thinking about wider 
possibilities. When you really know the underlying 
"why"—for the conference, for the staff party, for the 
elimination of the management position, or for the 
merger—it expands your thinking about how to 
make the desired result happen. When people write 
out their purpose for a project in my seminars, the y 
often claim it's like a fresh breeze blowing throug h 
their mind, clarifying their vision of what they're
doing. 
Is your purpose clear and specific enough? If you'r e truly 
experiencing the benefits of a purpose focus—motiva tion, clarity, 
decision-making criteria, alignment, and creativity —then your 
purpose probably is specific enough. But many "purpose state- 
ments" are too vague to produce such results. "To h ave a good 
department," for example, might be too broad a goal . After all, 
what constitutes a "good department"? Is it a group  of people who 
are highly motivated, collaborating in healthy ways , and taking 
65 If you're not sure 
why you're doing 
something, you can 
never do enough 
of it.
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE 
initiative? Or is it a department that comes in und er budget? In 
other words, if you don't really know when you've m et your pur- 
pose or when you're off track, you don't have a via ble directive. 
The question "How will I know when this is off-purp ose?" must 
have a clear answer. 
Principles 
Of equal value as prime criteria for driving and di recting a project are 
the standards and values you hold. Although people seldom think 
about these consciously, they are always there. And  if they are vio- 
lated, the result will inevitably be unproductive d istraction and stress. 
A great way to think about what your principles 
are is to complete this sentence: "I would give oth ers 
totally free rein to do this as long as they. . ."— what? 
What policies, stated or unstated, will apply to yo ur 
group's activities? "As long as they stayed within 
budget"? "satisfied the client"? "ensured a healthy
team"? "promoted a positive image"? 
It can be a major source of stress when others 
engage in or allow behavior that's outside your sta n- 
dards. If you never have to deal with this issue, y ou're 
truly graced. If you do, some constructive conversa - 
.tion about and clarification of principles could 
align the energy and prevent unnecessary conflict. 
You may want to begin by asking yourself, "What beh avior 
might undermine what I'm doing, and how can I preve nt 
it?" That will give you a good starting point for d efining your 
standards. 
Another great reason for focusing on principles is the clarity 
and reference point they provide for positive condu ct. How do 
you want or need to work with others on this projec t to ensure its 
success? You yourself are at your best when you're acting how? 
Whereas purpose provides the juice and the directio n, 
principles define the parameters of action and the criteria for 
excellence of behavior. 
66 Simple, clear 
purpose and 
principles give rise 
to complex and 
intelligent 
behavior. Complex 
rules and 
regulations give 
rise to simple and 
stupid behavior. 
—Dee 
CHAPTER 3  I  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING 
Vision/Outcome 
In order most productively to access the conscious and uncon- 
scious resources available to you, you must have a clear picture in 
your mind of what success would look, sound, and fe el like. Pur- 
pose and principles furnish the impetus and the mon itoring, but 
vision provides the actual blueprint of the final r esult. This is the 
"what?" instead of the "why?" What will this projec t or situation 
really be like when it successfully appears in the world? 
For example, graduates of your seminar are demonstr ating 
consistently applied knowledge of the subject matte r. Market 
share has increased 2 percent within the northeaste rn region over 
the last fiscal year. Your daughter is clear about your guidelines 
and support for her first semester in college. 
The Power of Focus 
Since the 1960s thousands of books have expounded o n the value 
of appropriate positive imagery and focus. Forward- looking focus 
has even been a key element in Olympic-level sports  training, 
with athletes imagining the physical effort, the po sitive energy, 
and the successful result to ensure the highest lev el of unconscious 
support for their performance. 
We know that the focus we hold in our minds 
affects what we perceive and how we perform. This i s 
as true on the golf course as it is in a staff meet ing or 
during a serious conversation with a spouse. My 
interest lies in providing a model for focus that i s 
dynamic in a practical way, especially in project 
thinking. 
When you focus on something—the vacation you're goi ng 
to 
take, the meeting you're about to go into, the prod uct you want to 
launch—that focus instantly creates ideas and thoug ht patterns 
you wouldn't have had otherwise. Even your physiolo gy will 
respond to an image in your head as if it were real ity. 
67 Imagination is 
more important 
than knowledge. 
—Albert Einstein 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE 
The Reticular Activating System The May 1957 issue of Scientific 
American contained an article describing the discovery of th e 
reticular formation at the base of the brain. The r eticular forma- 
tion is basically the gateway to your conscious awa reness; it's the 
switch that turns on your perception of ideas and d ata, the thing 
that keeps you asleep even when music's playing but  wakes you if 
a special little baby cries in another room. 
Just like a computer, your brain has a search 
function—but it's even more phenomenal than a 
computer's. It seems to be programmed by what we 
focus on and, more primarily, what we identify with . 
It's the seat of what many people have referred to as 
the paradigms we maintain. We notice only what 
matches our internal belief systems and identified 
contexts. If you're an optometrist, for example, yo u'll 
tend to notice people wearing eyeglasses across a 
crowded room; if you're a building contractor, you 
may notice the room's physical details. If you focu s 
on the color red right now and then just glance 
around your environment, if there is any red at all , 
you'll see even the tiniest bits of it. 
The implications of how this filtering works—
how we are unconsciously made conscious of infor- 
mation—could fill a weeklong seminar. Suffice it to
say that something automatic and extraordinary hap-
pens in your mind when you create and focus on a 
clear picture of what you want. 
Clarifying Outcomes 
There is a simple but profound principle that 
emerges from understanding the way your perceptive 
filters work: you won't see how to do it until you see 
yourself doing it. 
It's easy to envision something happening if it has  happened 
before or you have had experience with similar succ esses. It can be 
68 Your automatic 
creative mechanism 
is teleological. That 
is, it operates in 
terms of goals and 
end results. Once 
you give it a 
definite goal to 
achieve, you can 
depend upon its 
automatic guidance 
system to take you 
to that goal much 
better than "you" 
ever could by 
conscious thought. 
"You" supply the 
goal by thinking in 
terms of end 
results. Your 
automatic 
mechanism then 
supplies the means 
whereby. 
—Maxwell Maltz 
CHAPTER 3  I  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING 
quite a challenge, however, to identify with images  of 
success if they represent new and foreign territory —
that is, if you have few reference points about wha t 
an event might actually look like and little experi ence 
of your own ability to make it happen. 
Many of us hold ourselves back from imaging a 
desired outcome unless someone can show us how to get there. 
Unfortunately, that's backward in terms of how our minds work 
to generate and recognize solutions and methods. 
One of the most powerful skills in the world of kno wledge 
work, and one of the most important to hone and dev elop, is cre- 
ating clear outcomes. This is not as self-evident a s it 
may sound. We need to constantly define (and rede- 
fine) what we're trying to accomplish on many diffe r- 
ent   levels,   and   consistently   reallocate   r esources 
toward getting these tasks completed as effectively
and efficiently as possible. 
What will this project look like when it's done? 
How do you want the client to feel, and what do you  want him to 
know and do, after the presentation? Where will you  be in your 
career three years from now? How would the ideal V. P. of finance 
do his job? What would your Web site really look li ke and have as 
capabilities if it could be the way you wanted it? 
Outcome/vision can range from a simple statement of  the 
project, such as "Finalize computer-system implemen tation," 
to a completely scripted movie depicting the future  scene in all 
its glorious detail. Here are three basic steps for  developing a 
vision: 
1 |   View the project from beyond the completion dat e. 
2 |   Envision "WILD SUCCESS"! (Suspend "Yeah, but. .  .") 
3 |   Capture features, aspects, qualities you imagin e in place. 
When I get people to focus on a successful scenario  of their 
project, they usually experience heightened enthusi asm and think 
69 You often need to 
make it up in your 
mind before you 
can make it happen 
in your life.
I always wanted to 
be somebody. I 
should have been 
more specific. 
—Lily 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE 
of something unique and positive about it that hadn 't occurred to 
them before. "Wouldn't it be great if. . ." is not a bad way to start 
thinking about a situation, at least for long enoug h to have the 
option of getting an answer. 
The best way to get 
a good idea is to 
get lots of ideas. 
—Linus Pauling 
Your mind wants to 
fill in the blanks 
between here and 
there, but in 
somewhat random 
order. Brainstorming 
Once you know what you want to have happen, and 
why, the "how" mechanism is brought into play. 
When you identify with some picture in your mind 
that is different from your current reality, you au to- 
matically start filling in the gaps, or brainstormi ng. 
Ideas begin to pop into your head in somewhat ran- 
dom order—little ones, big ones, not-so-good ones, 
good ones. This process usually goes on internally for 
most people about most things, and that's often suf - 
ficient. For example, you think about what you want
to say to your boss as you're walking down the hall  to 
speak to her. But there are many other instances 
when writing things down, or capturing them in 
some external way, can give a tremendous boost to 
productive output and thinking. 
70 Capturing Your Ideas 
Over the last few decades, a number of graphics-ori ented brain- 
storming techniques have been introduced to help de velop cre- 
ative thinking about projects and topics. They've b een called 
things like mind-mapping, clustering, patterning, w ebbing, and 
fish-boning. Although the authors of these various processes may 
portray them as being different from one another, f or most of us 
end-users the basic premise remains the same: give yourself per- 
mission to capture and express any idea, and then later on figure 
out how it fits in and what to do with it. If nothi ng else (and there 
is plenty of "else"), this practice adds to your ef ficiency—when 
you have the idea, you grab it, which means you won 't have to go 
"have the idea" again. 
CHAPTER 3 |  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING 
The most popular of these techniques is called mind - 
mapping, a name coined by Tony Buzan, a British res earcher in 
brain functioning, to label this process of brainst orming ideas onto a 
graphic format. In mind-mapping, the core idea is p resented in the 
center, with associated ideas growing out in a some what free-form 
fashion around it. For instance, if I found out tha t I had to move my 
office, I might think about computers, changing my business cards, 
all the connections I'd have to change, new furnitu re, moving the 
phones, purging and packing, and so on. If I captur ed these thoughts 
graphically it might start to look something like t his: 

THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE 
You could do this kind of mind-mapping on Post-its that 
could be stuck on a whiteboard, or you could input ideas into a 
word processor or outlining program on the computer . 
Distributed Cognition 
The great thing about external brainstorming is tha t in addition to 
capturing your original ideas, it can help generate  many new ones 
that might not have occurred to you if you didn't h ave 
a mechanism to hold your thoughts and continually 
reflect them back to you. It's as if your mind were  to 
say, "Look, I'm only going to give you as many idea s 
as you feel you can effectively use. If you're not col- 
lecting them in some trusted way, I won't give you 
that many. But if you're actually doing something 
with the ideas—even if it's just recording them for
later evaluation—then here, have a bunch! And, oh w ow! That 
reminds me of another one, and another," etc. 
Psychologists are beginning to label this and simil ar 
processes "distributed cognition." It's getting thi ngs out of your 
head and into objective, reviewable formats. But my  English 
teacher in high school didn't have to know about th e theory to 
give me the key: "David," he said, "you're going to  college, and 
you're going to be writing papers. Write all your n otes and quotes 
on separate three-by-five cards. Then, when you get  ready to 
organize your thinking, just spread them all out on  the floor, see 
the structure, and figure out what you're missing."  Mr. Edmund- 
son was teaching me a major piece of the natural 
planning model! 
Few people can hold their focus on a topic for 
more than a couple of minutes, without some objec- 
tive structure and tool or trigger to help them. Pi ck a 
big project you have going right now and just try t o 
think of nothing else for more than sixty seconds. 
This is pretty hard to do unless you have a pen and
paper in hand and use those "cognitive artifacts" 
72 Nothing is more 
dangerous than an 
idea when it is the 
only one you have. 
—Emile Chartier 
Only he who 
handles his ideas 
lightly is master of 
his ideas, and only 
he who is master of 
his ideas is not 
enslaved by them. 
—Lin Yutang 
CHAPTER 3  |  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING 
as the anchor for your ideas. Then you can stay wit h it for hours. 
That's why good thinking can happen while you're wo rking on a 
computer document about a project, mind-mapping it on a legal 
pad of on a paper tablecloth in a hip restaurant, o r just having a 
meeting about it with other people in a room that a llows you to 
hold the context (a whiteboard with nice wet marker s really helps 
there, too). 
Brainstorming Keys 
Many techniques can be used to facilitate brainstor ming and out- 
of-the-box thinking. The basics principles, however , can be summed 
up as follows: 
• Don't judge, challenge, evaluate, or criticize. 
• Go for quantity, not quality. 
• Put analysis and organization in the background. 
Don't Judge, Challenge, Evaluate, or Criticize    It's easy for the 
unnatural planning model to rear its ugly head in b rainstorming, 
making people jump to premature evaluations and 
critiques of ideas. If you care even slightly about  what 
a critic thinks, you'll censure your expressive pro cess 
as you look for the "right" thing to say. There's a  very 
subtle distinction between keeping brainstorming on
target with the topic and stifling the creative pro cess. 
It's also important that brainstorming be put into the 
overall context of the planning process, because if
you think you're doing it just for its own sake, it  can seem trite and 
inappropriately off course. If you can understand i t instead as 
something you're doing right now, for a certain per iod, before you 
move toward a resolution at the end, you'll feel mo re comfortable 
giving this part of the process its due. 
This is not to suggest that you should shut off cri tical think- 
ing, though—everything ought to be fair game at thi s stage. It's 
just wise to understand what kinds of thoughts you' re having and 
73 A good way to find 
out what something 
might be is to 
uncover ail the 
things it's probably 
not. 
74 THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE 
to park them for use in the most appropriate way. T he primary 
criterion must be expansion, not contraction. 
Go for Quantity, Not Quality Going for quantity keeps your 
thinking expansive. Often you won't know what's a g ood idea 
until you have it. And sometimes you'll realize it' s a good idea, or 
the germ of one, only later on. You know how shoppi ng at a big 
store with lots of options lets you feel comfortabl e about your 
choice? The same holds true for project thinking. T he greater the 
volume of thoughts you have to work with, the bette r the context 
you can create for developing options and trusting your choices. 
Put Analysis and Organization in the Background Analysis and 
evaluation and organization of your thoughts should  be given as 
free a rein as creative out-of-the-box thinking. Bu t in the brain- 
storming phase, this critical activity should not b e the driver. 
Making a list can be a creative thing to do, a way to consider 
the people who should be on your team, the customer  require- 
ments for the software, or the components of the bu siness plan. 
Just make sure to grab all that and keep going unti l you get into 
the weeding and organizing of focus that make up th e next stage. 
Organizing 
If you've done a thorough job of emptying your head  of all the 
things that came up in the brainstorming phase, you 'll notice that 
a natural organization is emerging. As my high scho ol English 
teacher suggested, once you get all the ideas out o f your head and 
in front of your eyes, you'll automatically notice natural relation- 
ships and structure. This is what most people are r eferring to 
when they talk about "project plans." 
Organizing usually happens when you identify compon ents 
and subcomponents, sequences or events, and/or prio rities. What 
are the things that must occur to create the final result? In what 
order must they occur? What is the most important e lement to 
ensure the success of the project? 
CHAPTER 3  |  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY:.THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING 
This is the stage in which you can make good use of  struc- 
turing tools ranging from informal bullet points, s cribbled liter- 
ally on the back of an envelope, to project-plannin g 
software like Microsoft Project. When a project cal ls 
for substantial objective control, you'll need some
type of hierarchical outline with components and 
subcomponents, and/or a GANTT-type chart show- 
ing stages of the project laid out over time, with 
independent and dependent parts and milestones 
identified in relationship to the whole. 
Creative thinking doesn't stop here; it just takes another 
form. Once you perceive a basic structure, your min d will start 
trying to "fill in the blanks." Identifying three k ey things that you 
need to handle on the project, for example, may cau se you to 
think of a fourth and a fifth when you see them all  lined up. 
The Basics of Organizing 
The key steps here are: 
• Identify the significant pieces. 
• Sort by (one or more): 
• components 
• sequences 
• priorities 
•Detail to the required degree. 
I have never seen any two projects that needed to h ave 
exactly the same amount of structure and detail dev eloped in 
order to get things off people's minds and moving s uccessfully. 
But almost all projects can use some form of creati ve thinking 
from the left side of the brain, along the lines of  "What's the 
plan?" 
Next Actions 
The final stage of planning comes down to decisions  about the 
allocation and reallocation of physical resources t o actually get 
75 A "project plan" 
identifies the 
smaller outcomes,
which can then be 
naturally planned.
76 THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE 
«
the project moving. The question to ask here is, "W hat's the next 
action?" 
As we noted in the previous chapter, this kind of g rounded, 
reality-based thinking, combined with clarification  of the desired 
outcome, forms the critical component of knowledge work. In my 
experience, creating a list of what your real proje cts are and con- 
sistently managing your next action for each one wi ll constitute 
90 percent of what is generally thought of as proje ct planning. 
This "runway level" approach will make you "honest"  about all 
kinds of things: Are you really serious about doing  this? Who's 
responsible? Have you thought things through enough ? 
At some point, if the project is an actionable one,  this next- 
action decision must be made.* Answering the questi on about 
what specifically you would do about something phys ically if you 
had nothing else to do will test the maturity of yo ur thinking 
about the project. If you're not yet ready to answe r that ques- 
tion, you have more to flesh out at some prior leve l in the natural 
planning sequence. 
The Basics 
• Decide on next actions for each of the current movi ng parts of 
the project. 
• Decide on the next action in the planning process, if necessary. 
Activating the "Moving Parts" A project is sufficiently planned 
for implementation when every next-action step has been decided 
on every front that can actually be moved on withou t some other 
component's having to be completed first. If the pr oject has mul- 
tiple components, each of them should be assessed a ppropriately 
by asking, "Is there something that anyone could be  doing on this 
right now?" You could be coordinating speakers for the confer- 
*You can also plan nonactionable projects and not need a next action—for exam- 
ple, designing your dream house. The lack of a next  action by default makes it a 
"someday/maybe" project. . . and that's fine for an ything of that nature. 
CHAPTER 3  I  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING 
ence, for instance, at the same time that you're fi nding the appro- 
priate site. 
In some cases there will be only one aspect that ca n be acti- 
vated, and everything else will depend on the resul ts of that. So 
there may be only one next action, which will be th e linchpin for 
all the rest. 
More to Plan? What if there's still more planning to be done 
before you can feel comfortable with what's next? T here's still an 
action step—it is just a process action. What's the next step in the 
continuation of planning? Drafting more ideas. E-ma iling Ana 
Maria and Sean to get their input. Telling your ass istant to set up 
a planning meeting with the product team. 
The habit of clarifying the next action on projects , no matter 
what the situation, is fundamental to you staying i n relaxed control. 
When the Next Action Is Someone Else's . . .  If the next action is 
not yours, you must nevertheless clarify whose it i s (this is a pri- 
mary use of the "Waiting For" action list). In a gr oup-planning 
situation, it isn't necessary for everyone to know what the next 
step is on every part of the project. Often all tha t's required is to 
allocate responsibility for parts of the project to  the appropriate 
persons and leave it up to them to identify next ac tions on their 
particular pieces. 
This next-action conversation forces organizational  clarity. 
Issues and details emerge that don't show up until someone holds 
everyone's "feet to the fire" about the physical-le vel reality of 
resource allocation. It's a simple, practical discu ssion to foster, and 
one that can significantly stir the pot and identif y weak links. 
How Much Planning Do You Really Need to Do? 
How much of this planning model do you really need to flesh out, 
and to what degree of detail? The simple answer is,  as much as 
you need to get the project off your mind. 
In general, the reason things are on your mind is t hat the 
77 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE   j   PART ONE 
outcome and the action step(s) have not been approp riately 
defined, and/or reminders of them have not been put  in places 
where you can be trusted to look for them appropria tely. Addi- 
tionally, you may not have developed the details, p erspectives, and 
solutions sufficiently to trust the efficacy of you r blueprint. 
Most projects, given my definition of a project as an outcome 
requiring more than one action, need no more than a  listing 
of their outcome and next action for you to get 
them off your mind. You need a new stockbroker? 
You just have to call a friend for a recommenda- 
tion. You want to set up a printer at home? You 
just need to surf the Web to check out different 
models and prices. I estimate that 80 percent of 
projects are of that nature. You'll still be doing the full planning 
model on all of them, but only in your head, and ju st enough 
to figure out next actions and keep them going unti l they're 
complete. 
Another 15 percent or so of projects might require at least 
some external form of brainstorming—maybe a mind-ma p or a 
few notes in a word processor or PowerPoint file. T hat might be 
sufficient for planning meeting agendas, your vacat ion, or a 
speech to the local chamber of commerce. 
A final 5 percent of projects might need the delibe rate appli- 
cation of one or more of the five phases of the nat ural planning 
model. The model provides a practical recipe for un sticking 
things, resolving them, and moving them forward pro ductively. 
Are you aware of a need for greater clarity, or gre ater action, on 
any of your projects? If so, using the model can of ten be the key to 
making effective progress. 
Need More Clarity? 
If greater clarity is what you need, shift your thi nking up the 
natural planning scale. People are often very busy {action) but 
nonetheless experience confusion and a lack of clea r direction. 
They need to pull out their plan, or create one {organize). If there's 
78 If the project is still
on your mind, 
there's more 
planning to do. 
CHAPTER 3  I   GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE  PHASES OF PLANNING 
a lack of clarity at the planning level, there's pr obably a need for 
more brainstorming to generate a sufficient inventory of ideas to 
create trust in the plan. If the brainstorming sess ion gets bogged 
down with fuzzy thinking, the focus should shift ba ck to the 
vision of the outcome, ensuring that the reticular filter in the brain 
will open up to deliver the best how-to thinking. I f the outcome/ 
vision is unclear, you must return to a clean analysis of why you're 
engaged in the situation in the first place {purpose). 
Need More to Be Happening? 
If more action is what's needed, you need to move down the 
model. There may be enthusiasm about the purpose of a project 
but at the same time some resistance to actually 
fleshing out what fulfilling it in the real world m ight 
look like. These days, the task of "improving quali ty 
of work life" may be on the radar for a manager, bu t 
often he won't yet have defined a clear picture of the 
desired result. The thinking must go to the specifi cs 
of the vision. Again, ask yourself, "What would the 
outcome look like?" 
If you've formulated an answer to that question, bu t things 
are still stuck, it's probably time for you to grap ple with some of 
the "how" issues and the operational details and pe rspectives 
{brainstorming). I often have clients who have inherited a relativel y 
clearly articulated project, like "Implement the ne w performance- 
review system," but who aren't moving forward becau se they 
haven't yet taken a few minutes to dump some ideas out about 
what that might entail. 
If brainstorming gets hung up (and very often it do es for 
more "blue sky" types), rigor may be required to do  some evalua- 
tion of and decision-making about mission-critical deliverables 
that have to be handled {organizing). This is sometimes the case 
when an informal back-and-forth meeting that has ge nerated lots 
of ideas ends without producing any decision about what actually 
needs to happen next on the project. 
79 Plans get you into 
things but you've 
got to work your 
way out. 
—
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE 
And if there is a plan, but the rubber still isn't hitting the 
road like it should, someone needs to assess each c omponent with 
the focus of "What's the next action, and who's got  it?" One man- 
ager, who had taken over responsibility many months  in advance 
for organizing a major annual conference, asked me how to pre- 
vent the crisis all-nighters her team had experienc ed near the 
deadline the previous year. When she produced an ou tline of the 
various pieces of the project she'd inherited, I as ked, "Which 
pieces could actually be moved on right now?" After  identifying 
half a dozen, we clarified the next action on each one. It was off 
and running. 
In the last two chapters, I have covered the basic models of how to 
stay maximally productive and in control, with mini mal effort, at 
the two most basic levels of our life and work: the  actions we take 
and the projects we enter into that generate many o f those 
actions. 
The fundamentals remain true—you must be 
responsible for collecting all your open loops, app ly- 
ing a front-end thought process to each of them, an d 
managing the results with organization, review, and
action. 
For all those situations that you have any level 
of commitment to complete, there is a natural plan-
ning process that goes on to get you from here to 
there. Leveraging that five-phase model can often 
make the evolution easier, faster, and more product ive. 
These models are simple to understand and easy to i mple- 
ment. Applying them creates remarkable results. You  need essen- 
tially no new skills—you already know how to write things down, 
clarify outcomes, decide next actions, put things i nto categories, 
review it all, and make intuitive choices. Right now you have the 
ability to focus on successful results, brainstorm,  organize your 
thinking, and get moving on your next steps. 
But just knowing how to do all of those things does  not pro- 
80 You need no new 
skills to increase 
your productivity- 
just a new set of 
behaviors about 
when and where to 
apply them. 
CHAPTER 3  I  GETTING PROJECTS CREATIVELY UNDER WAY: THE FIVE PHASES OF PLANNING 
duce results. Merely having the ability to be highly productive, 
relaxed, and in control doesn't make you that way. If you're like 
most people, you can use a coach—someone to walk yo u step by 
step through the experience and provide some guidep osts and 
handy tricks along the way, until your new operatio nal style is ele- 
gantly embedded. 
You'll find that in part 2. 
81