A New Practice for a New Reality 
IT'S POSSIBLE FOR a person to have an overwhelming number of 
things to do and still function productively with a  clear head and a 
positive sense of relaxed control. That's a great w ay to live and 
work, at elevated levels of effectiveness and effic iency. It's also 
becoming a critical operational style required of s uccessful and 
high-performing professionals. You already know how  to do 
everything necessary to achieve this high-performan ce state. If 
you're like most people, however, you need to apply  these skills in 
a more timely, complete, and systematic way so you can get on top 
of it all instead of feeling buried. And though the
method and the techniques I describe in this book 
are immensely practical and based on common sense, 
most people will have some major work habits that 
must be modified before they can implement this 
system. The small changes required—changes in the 
way you clarify and organize all the things that co m- 
mand your attention—could represent a significant 
shift in how you approach some key aspects of your day-to-day 
work. Many of my clients have referred to this as a  significant 
paradigm shift. 
The methods I present here are all based on two key  objec- 
tives:(1) capturing all the things that need to get done—now, later, 
someday, big, little, or in between—into a logical and trusted sys- 
tem outside of your head and off your mind; and (2)  disciplining 
yourself to make front-end decisions about all of m e "inputs" you 
3Anxiety is caused 
by a lack of control, 
organization, 
preparation, and 
action. 
.  —David 
4THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE 
let into your life so that you will always have a p lan for "next 
actions" that you can implement or renegotiate at a ny moment. 
This book offers a proven method for this kind of h igh- 
performance workflow management. It provides good t ools, tips, 
techniques, and tricks for implementation. As you'l l discover, the 
principles and methods are instantly usable and app licable to 
everything you have to do in your personal as well as your profes- 
sional life.* You can incorporate, as many others h ave before you, 
what I describe as an ongoing dynamic style of oper ating in your 
work and in your world. Or, like still others, you can simply use 
this as a guide to getting back into better control  when you feel 
you need to. 
The Problem: New Demands, 
Insufficient Resources 
Almost everyone I encounter these days feels he or she has too 
much to handle and not enough time to get it all do ne. In the 
course of a single recent week, I consulted with a partner in a 
major global investment firm who was concerned that  the new 
corporate-management responsibilities he was being offered 
would stress his family commitments beyond the limi ts; and with 
a midlevel human-resources manager trying to stay o n top of her 
150-plus e-mail requests per day fueled by the goal  of doubling 
the company's regional office staff from eleven hun dred to two 
thousand people in one year, all as she tried to pr otect a social life 
for herself on the weekends. 
A paradox has emerged in this new millennium: peopl e have 
*I consider "work," in its most universal sense, as  meaning anything that you 
want or need to be different than it currently is. Many people make a distinc- 
tion between "work" and "personal life," but I don' t: to me, weeding the garden 
or updating my will is just as much "work" as writi ng this book or coaching a 
client. All the methods and techniques in this book  are applicable across that 
life/work spectrum—to be effective, they need to be . 
CHAPTER 1   |  A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY 
enhanced quality of life, but at the same time they  are adding to 
their stress levels by taking on more than they hav e resources to 
handle. It's as though their eyes were bigger than their stomachs. 
And most people are to some degree frustrated and p erplexed 
about how to improve the situation. 
Work No Longer Has Clear Boundaries 
A major factor in the mounting stress level is that  the 
actual nature of our jobs has changed much more dra - 
matically and rapidly than have our training for an d 
our ability to deal with work. In just the last hal f of 
the twentieth century, what constituted "work" in t he 
industrialized world was transformed from assembly-
line, make-it and move-it kinds of activity to what
Peter Drucker has so aptly termed "knowledge work."
In the old days, work was self-evident. Fields 
were to be plowed, machines tooled, boxes packed, 
cows milked, widgets cranked. You knew what work ha d to be 
done—you could see it. It was clear when the work w as finished, 
or not finished. 
Now, for many of us, there are no edges to most of our proj- 
ects. Most people I know have at least half a dozen  things they're 
trying to achieve right now, and even if they had t he 
rest of their lives to try, they wouldn't be able t o finish 
these to perfection. You're probably faced with the
same dilemma. How good could that conference 
potentially be? How effective could the training pr o- 
gram be, or the structure of your executives' compe n- 
sation package? How inspiring is the essay you're 
writing? How motivating the staff meeting? How 
functional the reorganization? And a last question:
How much available data could be relevant to doing those proj- 
ects "better"? The answer is, an infinite amount, e asily accessible, 
or at least potentially so, through the Web. 
On another front, the lack of edges can create more work 
5Time is the 
quality of nature 
that keeps events 
from happening all 
at once. Lately it 
doesn't seem to be 
working. 
—Anonymous 
Almost every 
project could be 
done better, and an 
infinite quantity of
information is now 
available that could 
make that happen.
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE 
for everyone. Many of today's organizational outcom es require 
cross-divisional communication, cooperation, and en gagement. 
Our individual office silos are crumbling, and with  them is going 
the luxury of not having to read cc'd e-mails from the marketing 
department, or from human resources, or from some a d hoc, deal- 
with-a-certain-issue committee. 
Our Jobs Keep Changing 
The disintegrating edges of our projects and our wo rk in general 
would be challenging enough for anyone. But now we must add 
to that equation the constantly shifting definition  of our jobs. I 
often ask in my seminars, "Which of you are doing o nly what you 
were hired to do?" Seldom do I get a raised hand. A s amorphous 
as edgeless work may be, if you had the chance to s tick with some 
specifically described job long enough, you'd proba bly figure out 
what you needed to do—how much, at what level—to st ay 
sane. 
But few have that luxury anymore, for two reasons: 
We can never 
really be prepared 
for that which is 
wholly new. We 
have to adjust  , •
ourselves, and 
every radical 
adjustment is a 
crisis in self- 
esteem: we undergo 
a test, we have to 
prove ourselves. It 
needs subordinate 
self-confidence to 
face drastic change 
without inner 
trembling. 
—Eric 
Hoffer 1 |  The organizations we're involved with seem to 
be in constant morph mode, with ever-changing 
goals, products, partners, customers, markets, 
technologies, and owners. These all, by neces- 
sity, shake up structures, forms, roles, and 
responsibilities. 
2 |  The average professional is more of a free agen t 
these days than ever before, changing careers as 
often as his or her parents once changed jobs. 
Even fortysomethings and fiftysomethings hold 
to standards of continual growth. Their aims are 
just more integrated into the mainstream now, 
covered by the catchall "professional, manage- 
ment, and executive development"—which sim- 
ply means they won't keep doing what they're 
doing for any extended period of time. 
6
CHAPTER 1   I  A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY 
Little seems clear for very long anymore, as far as  what our 
work is and what or how much input may be relevant 
to doing it well. We're allowing in huge amounts of
information and communication from the outer 
world and generating an equally large volume of 
ideas and agreements with ourselves and others from
our inner world. And we haven't been well equipped to deal with 
this huge number of internal and external commitmen ts. 
The Old Models and Habits Are Insufficient 
Neither our standard education, nor traditional tim e-management 
models, nor the plethora of organizing tools availa ble, such as 
personal notebook planners, Microsoft Outlook, or P alm per- 
sonal digital assistants (PDAs), has given us a via ble means of 
meeting the new demands placed on us. If you've tri ed to use any 
of these processes or tools, you've probably found 
them unable to accommodate the speed, complexity, 
and changing priority factors inherent in what you 
are doing. The ability to be successful, relaxed, a nd in 
control  during these  fertile  but turbulent times
demands new ways of thinking and working. There 
is a great need for new methods, technologies, and 
work habits to help us get on top of our world. 
The traditional approaches to time management and p er- 
sonal organization were useful in their time. They provided help- 
ful reference points for a workforce that was just emerging from 
an industrial assembly-line modality into a new kin d of work that 
included choices about what to do and discretion ab out when to 
do it. When "time" itself turned into a work factor , personal cal- 
endars became a key work tool. (Even as late as the  1980s many 
professionals considered having a pocket Day-Timer the essence 
of being organized, and many people today think of their calendar 
as the central tool for being in control.) Along wi th discretionary 
time also came the need to make good choices about what to do. 
"ABC" priority codes and daily "to-do" lists were k ey techniques 
7The burner I go, 
the behinder I get. 
—Anonymous 
The winds and 
waves are always 
on the side of the 
ablest navigators. 
—Edward Gibbon 
8THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE | PART ONE 
that people developed to help them sort through the ir choices in 
some meaningful way. If you had the freedom to deci de what to 
do, you also had the responsibility to make good ch oices, given 
your "priorities." 
What you've probably discovered, at least at some l evel, is 
that a calendar, though important, can really effec tively manage 
only a small portion of what you need to organize. And daily 
to-do lists and simplified priority coding have pro ven inadequate 
to deal with the volume and variable nature of the average profes- 
sional's workload. More and more people's jobs are made up of 
dozens or even hundreds of e-mails a day, with no l atitude left to 
ignore a single request, complaint, or order. There  are few people 
who can (or even should) expect to code everything an "A," a "B," 
or a "C" priority, or who can maintain some predete rmined list of 
to-dos that the first telephone call or interruptio n from their boss 
won't totally undo. 
The "Big Picture" vs. the Nitty-Gritty 
At the other end of the spectrum, a huge number of business 
books, models, seminars, and gurus have championed the "bigger 
view" as the solution to dealing with our complex w orld. Clarify- 
ing major goals and values, so the thinking goes, g ives order, 
meaning, and direction to our work. In practice, ho wever, the 
well-intentioned exercise of values thinking too of ten does not 
achieve its desired results. I have seen too many o f these efforts 
fail, for one or more of the following three reason s: 
1 |   There is too much distraction at the day-to-da y, hour-to- 
hour level of commitments to allow for appropriate focus on 
the higher levels. 
2 |   Ineffective personal organizational systems cr eate huge sub- 
conscious resistance to undertaking even bigger pro jects and 
goals that will likely not be managed well, and tha t will in 
turn cause even more distraction and stress. 
3 |   When loftier levels and values actually are clarified, it raises 
CHAPTER 1 | A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY 
the bar of our standards, making us notice that 
much more that needs changing. We are already 
having a serious negative reaction to the over- 
whelming number of things we have to do. And 
what created much of the work that's on those 
lists in the first place? Our values! Focusing on values 
does not simplify 
your life. It gives 
meaning and 
direction—and a 
lot 
more complexity. 
Focusing on primary outcomes and values is a critical exer- 
cise, certainly. But it does not mean there is less  to do, or fewer 
challenges in getting the work done. Quite the cont rary: it just 
ups the ante in the game, which still must be playe d day to day. 
For a human-resources executive, for example, decid ing to deal 
with quality-of-work-life issues in order to attrac t and keep key 
talent does not make things simpler. 
There has been a missing piece in our new culture o f knowl- 
edge work: a system with a coherent set of behavior s and tools 
that functions effectively at the level at which wo rk really hap- 
pens. It must incorporate the results of big-pictur e thinking 
as well as the smallest of open details. It must ma nage multi- 
ple tiers of priorities. It must maintain control o ver hundreds 
of new inputs daily. It must save a lot more time a nd effort than 
are needed to maintain it. It must make it easier t o get things 
done. 
The Promise: The "Ready State" 
of the Martial Artist 
Reflect for a moment on what it actually might be l ike if your per- 
sonal management situation were totally under contr ol, at all lev- 
els and at all times. What if you could dedicate fu lly 100 percent 
of your attention to whatever was at hand, at your own choosing, 
with no distraction? 
It is possible. There is a way to get a grip on it all, stay 
relaxed, and get meaningful things done with minima l effort, 
9
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE 
Life is denied by 
lack of attention, 
 whether it be to 
cleaning windows 
or trying to write 
a masterpiece. .
—
Nadia 
Boulanger 
Your ability to 
generate power is 
directly proportional
to your ability to 
relax. across the whole spectrum of your life and work. Yo u 
can experience what the martial artists call a "mind 
like water" and top athletes refer to as the "zone, " 
within the complex world in which you're engaged. 
In fact, you have probably already been in this sta te 
from time to time. 
It's a condition of working, doing, and being in 
which the mind is clear and constructive things are
happening. It's a state that is accessible by every one, 
and one that is increasingly needed to deal effecti vely 
with the complexity of life in the twenty-first cen tury. 
More and more it will be a required condition for 
high-performance professionals who wish to maintain
balance and a consistent positive output in their w ork. 
World-class rower Craig Lambert has described how 
it feels in Mind Over Water (Houghton Miffin, 1998): 
10 Rowers have a word for this frictionless state: swi ng. . . . Recall 
the pure joy of riding on a backyard swing: an easy  cycle of 
motion, the momentum coming from the swing itself. The swing 
carries us; we do not force it. We pump our legs to  drive our arc 
higher, but gravity does most of the work. We are n ot so much 
swinging as being swung. The boat swings you. The s hell wants 
to move fast: Speed sings in its lines and nature. Our job is 
simply to work with the shell, to stop holding it b ack with our 
thrashing struggles to go faster. Trying too hard s abotages boat 
speed. Trying becomes striving and striving undoes itself Social 
climbers strive to be aristocrats but their efforts  prove them no 
such thing. Aristocrats do not strive; they have al ready arrived. 
Swing is a state of arrival. 
The "Mind Like Water" Simile 
In karate there is an image that's used to define t he position of 
perfect readiness: "mind like water." Imagine throw ing a pebble 
into a still pond. How does the water respond? The answer is, 
CHAPTER 1  I A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY 
totally appropriately to the force and mass of the 
input; then it returns to calm. It doesn't overreac t or 
underreact. 
The power in a karate punch comes from speed, 
not muscle; it comes from a focused "pop" at the en d 
of the whip. That's why petite people can learn to 
break boards and bricks with their hands: it doesn' t 
take calluses or brute strength, just the ability t o gen- 
erate a focused thrust with speed. But a tense musc le is a slow one. 
So the high levels of training in the martial arts teach and demand 
balance and relaxation as much as anything else. Cl earing the 
mind and being flexible are key. 
Anything that causes you to overreact or under- 
react can control you, and often does. Responding 
inappropriately to your e-mail, your staff, your pr oj- 
ects, your unread magazines, your thoughts about 
what you need to do, your children, or your boss wi ll 
lead to less effective results than you'd like. Mos t 
people give either more or less attention to things
than they deserve, simply because they don't operat e 
with a "mind like water." 
Can You Get into Your "Productive State" 
When Required? 
Think about the last time you felt highly productiv e. 
You probably had a sense of being in control; you 
were not stressed out; you were highly focused on 
what you were doing; time tended to disappear 
(lunchtime already?); and you felt you were making 
noticeable progress toward a meaningful outcome. 
Would you like to have more such experiences? 
And if you get seriously far out of that 
state—and start to feel out of control, stressed 
out, unfocused, bored, and stuck—do you have the 
ability to get yourself back into it? That's where the 
11 If your mind is 
empty, it is always 
ready for anything; 
it is open to 
everything. 
—Sbunryu Suzuki 
Anything that
causes you to 
overreact or 
underreact can 
control you, and 
often does.
There is one thing 
we can do, and the 
happiest people are 
those who can do 
it to the limit of 
their ability. We 
can be completely 
present. We can 
be all here. We 
can . . . give all 
our attention to 
the opportunity 
before us. 
—
Mark 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE 
methodology of Getting Things Done will have the greatest impact 
on your life, by showing you how to get back to "mi nd like water," 
with all your resources and faculties functioning a t a maximum level. 
The Principle: Dealing Effectively 
with Internal Commitments 
A basic truism I have discovered over twenty years of coaching 
and training is that most of the stress people expe rience comes 
from inappropriately managed commitments they make or 
accept. Even those who are not consciously "stresse d out" will 
invariably experience greater relaxation, better fo cus, and 
increased productive energy when they learn more ef fectively to 
control the "open loops" of their lives. 
You've probably made many more agreements with your self 
than you realize, and every single one of them-big or little—is 
being tracked by a less-than-conscious part of you.  These are the 
"incompletes," or "open loops," which I define as a nything pulling 
at your attention that doesn't belong where it is, the way it is. 
Open loops can include everything from really big t o-do items 
like "End world hunger" to the more modest "Hire ne w assistant" 
to the tiniest task such as "Replace electric penci l sharpener." 
It's likely that you also have more internal commit ments cur- 
rently in play than you're aware of. Consider how m any things you 
feel even the smallest amount of responsibility to 
change, finish, handle, or do something about. You 
have a commitment, for instance, to deal in some 
way with every new communication landing in your 
e-mail, on your voice-mail, and in your in-basket. 
And surely there are numerous projects that you 
sense need to be defined in your areas of responsi-
bility, as well as goals and directions to be clari fied, a 
career to be managed, and life in general to be kep t in balance. 
You have accepted some level of internal responsibi lity for every- 
12 Anything that does 
not belong where it 
is, the way it is, is 
an "open loop" 
pulling on your 
attention. 
CHAPTER 1   |  A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY 
thing in your life and work that represents an open  loop of any 
sort. 
In order to deal effectively with all of that, you must first 
identify and collect all those things that are "rin ging your bell" 
in some way, and then plan how to handle them. That  may seem 
like a simple thing to do, but in practice most peo ple don't know 
how to do it in a consistent way. 
The Basic Requirements for Managing Commitments 
Managing commitments well requires the implementati on of 
some basic activities and behaviors: 
• First of all, if it's on your mind, your mind isn't  clear. Anything 
you consider unfinished in any way must be captured  in a trusted 
system outside your mind, or what I call a collecti on bucket, that 
you know you'll come back to regularly and sort thr ough. 
• Second, you must clarify exactly what your commitme nt is and 
decide what you have to do, if anything, to make pr ogress 
toward fulfilling it. 
• Third, once you've decided on all the actions you n eed to take, 
you must keep reminders of them organized in a syst em you 
review regularly. 
An Important Exercise to Test This Model 
I suggest that you write down the project or situation that is most on
your mind at this moment. What most "bugs" you, distracts you, or 
interests you, or in some other way consumes a larg e part of your 
conscious attention? It may be a project or problem  that is really 
"in your face," something you are being pressed to handle, or a 
situation you feel you must deal with sooner rather  than later. 
Maybe you have a vacation trip coming up that you n eed to 
make some major last-minute decisions about. Or per haps you 
just inherited six million dollars and you don't kn ow what to do 
with the cash. Whatever. 
13 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE I PART ONE 
Got it? Good. Now describe, in a single written sen tence, 
your intended successful outcome for this problem o r situation. 
In other words, what would need to happen for you t o check 
this "project" off as "done"? It could be as simple  as "Take the 
Hawaii vacation," "Handle situation with customer X ," "Resolve 
college situation with Susan," "Clarify new divisio nal manage- 
ment structure," or "Implement new investment strat egy." All 
clear? Great. 
Now write down the very next physical action required to move 
the situation forward. If you had nothing else to do in your life but 
get closure on this, where would you go right now, and what visi- 
ble action would you take? Would you pick up a phon e and make 
a call? Go to your computer and write an e-mail? Si t down with 
pen and paper and brainstorm about it? Talk face-to -face with 
your spouse, your secretary, your attorney, or your  boss? Buy nails 
at the hardware store? What? 
Got the answer to that? Good. 
Was there any value for you in these two minutes of  think- 
ing? If you're like the vast majority of people who  complete that 
drill during my seminars, you'll be experiencing at
least a tiny bit of enhanced control, relaxation, a nd 
focus. You'll also be feeling more motivated to act u- 
ally do something about that situation you've merely 
     been thinking about till now. Imagine that mot iva- 
tion magnified a thousandfold, as a way to live and
work. 
If anything at all positive happened for you in thi s little exer- 
cise, think about this: What changed? What happened  to create that 
improved condition within your own experience? The situation itself 
is no further along, at least in the physical world . It's certainly not 
finished yet. What probably happened is that you ac quired a clearer 
definition of the outcome desired and the next acti on required. 
But what created that? The answer is, thinking. Not a lot, just 
enough to solidify your commitment and the resource s required 
to fulfill it. 
14 Think like a man 
of action, act like a 
man of thought.'
—Henry Bergson 
CHAPTER 1   I  A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY 
The Real Work of Knowledge Work 
Welcome to the real-life experience of "knowledge w ork," and a 
profound operational principle: You have to think about your stuff 
more than you realize but not as much as you're afr aid you might. As 
Peter Drucker has written, "In knowledge work ... 
the task is not given; it has to be determined. 'Wh at 
are the expected results from this work?' is ... th e 
key question in making knowledge workers produc- 
tive. And it is a question that demands risky deci-
sions. There is usually no right answer; there are 
choices instead. And results have to be clearly spe ci- 
fied, if productivity is to be achieved." 
Most people have a resistance to initiating the bur st of 
energy that it will take to clarify the real meanin g, for them, of 
something they have let into their world, and to de cide what they 
need to do about it. We're never really taught that  we have to 
think about our work before we can do it; much of o ur daily 
activity is already defined for us by the undone an d unmoved 
things staring at us when we come to work, or by th e family to be 
fed, the laundry to be done, or the children to be dressed at home. 
Thinking in a concentrated manner to define desired  outcomes is 
something few people feel they have to do. But in t ruth, outcome 
thinking is one of the most effective means availab le for making 
wishes reality. 
Why Things Are on Your Mind 
Most often, the reason something is "on your mind" is that you 
want it to be different than it currently is, and y et: 
• you haven't clarified exactly what the intended out come is; 
• you haven't decided what the very next physical act ion step is; 
and/or 
• you haven't put reminders of the outcome and the ac tion 
required in a system you trust. 
15 The ancestor of 
every action is a 
thought. 
—Ralph 
Waldo 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE 
That's why it's on your mind. Until those thoughts have 
been clarified and those decisions made, and the re sulting data 
has been stored in a system that you absolutely know 
you will think about as often as you need to, your 
brain can't give up the job. You can fool everyone 
else, but you can't fool your own mind. It knows 
whether or not you've come to the conclusions you 
need to, and whether you've put the resulting out- 
comes and action reminders in a place that can be 
trusted to resurface appropriately within your con-
scious mind. If you haven't done those things, it 
won't quit working overtime. Even if you've already
decided on the next step you'll take to resolve a p rob- 
lem, your mind can't let go until and unless you wr ite yourself 
a reminder in a place it knows you will, without fail, look. It 
will keep pressuring you about that untaken next st ep, usually 
when you can't do anything about it, which will jus t add to your 
stress. 
16 Your Mind Doesn't Have a Mind of Its Own 
At least a portion of your mind is really kind of s tupid, in an interest- 
ing way. If it had any innate intelligence, it woul d remind you of the 
things you needed to do only when you could do something about them. 
Do you have a flashlight somewhere with dead batter ies in 
it? When does your mind tend to remind you that you  need new 
batteries? When you notice the dead ones! That's no t very smart. 
If your mind had any innate intelligence, it would remind you 
about those dead batteries only when you passed liv e ones in a 
store. And ones of the right size, to boot. 
Between the time you woke up today and now, did you  think 
of anything you needed to do that you still haven't  done? Have 
you had that thought more than once? Why? It's a wa ste of time 
and energy to keep thinking about something that yo u make no 
progress on. And it only adds to your anxieties abo ut what you 
should be doing and aren't. This constant, 
unproductive 
preoccupation with 
all the things we 
have to do is the 
single largest 
consumer of time 
and energy. 
—Kerry 
CHAPTER 1  [ A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY 
It seems that most people let their minds run a lot  of the 
show, especially where the too-much-to-do syndrome is con- 
cerned. You've probably given over a lot of your 
"stuff," a lot of your open loops, to an entity on your 
inner committee that is incapable of dealing with 
those things effectively the way they are—your mind . 
The Transformation of "Stuff" 
Here's how I define "stuff": anything you have allo wed into your 
psychological or physical world that doesn't belong  where it is, but 
for which you haven't yet determined the desired ou tcome and the 
next action step. The reason most organizing system s 
haven't worked for most people is that they haven't
yet transformed all the "stuff" they're trying to o rga- 
nize. As long as it's still "stuff," it's not contr ollable. 
Most of the to-do lists I have seen over the years 
(when people had them at all) were merely listings of 
"stuff," not inventories of the resultant real work  that 
needed to be done. They were partial reminders of a
lot of things that were unresolved and as yet untra nslated into out- 
comes and actions—that is, the real outlines and de tails of what 
the list-makers had to "do." 
"Stuff" is not inherently a bad thing. Things that command 
our attention, by their very nature, usually show u p as "stuff." But 
once "stuff" comes into our lives and work, we have  an inherent 
commitment to ourselves to define and clarify its m eaning. That's 
our responsibility as knowledge workers; if "stuff"  were already 
transformed and clear, our value, other than physic al labor, would 
probably not be required. 
At the conclusion of one of my seminars, a senior m anager of a 
major biotech firm looked back at the to-do lists s he had come in 
with and said, "Boy, that was an amorphous blob of undoability!" 
That's the best description I've ever heard of what  passes for orga- 
nizing lists in most personal systems. The vast maj ority of people 
have been trying to get organized by rearranging in complete lists of 
17 Rule your mind or 
it will rule you. 
—
We need to 
transform all the 
"stuff" we're trying 
to organize into 
actionable stuff we 
need to do.
18 THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  I  PART ONE 
unclear things; they haven't yet realized how much and what they 
need to organize in order to get the real payoff. T hey need to gather 
everything that requires thinking about and then do that thinking if 
their organizational efforts are to be successful. 
The Process: Managing Action 
You can train yourself, almost like an athlete, to be faster, more 
responsive, more proactive, and more focused in kno wledge 
work. You can think more effectively and manage the  results 
with more ease and control. You can minimize the lo ose ends 
across the whole spectrum of your work life and per sonal life 
and get a lot more done with less effort. And you c an make front- 
end decision-making about all the "stuff" you colle ct and create 
standard operating procedure for living and working  in this new 
millennium. 
Before you can achieve any of that, though, you'll need to get 
in the habit of keeping nothing on your mind. And t he way to do 
that, as we've seen, is not by managing time, managing in forma- 
tion, or managing priorities. After all: 
• you don't manage five minutes and wind up with six;
• you don't manage information overload—otherwise you 'd walk 
into a library and die, or the first time you conne cted to the Web, 
or even opened a phone book, you'd blow up; and 
• you don't manage priorities—you have them. 
Instead, the key to managing all of your "stuff" is  managing 
your actions. 
Managing Action Is the Prime Challenge 
What you do with your time, what you do with information, 
and what you do with your body and your focus relative to your 
CHAPTER 1  I  A NEW PRACTICE FOR ANEW REALITY 
priorities—those are the real options to which you must allocate 
your limited resources. The real issue is how to ma ke appropriate 
choices about what to do at any point in time. The real issue is 
how we manage actions. 
That may sound obvious. However, it might amaze you  to 
discover how many next actions for how many project s and com- 
mitments remain undetermined by most people. It's 
extremely difficult to manage actions you haven't 
identified or decided on. Most people have dozens o f 
things that they need to do to make progress on 
many fronts, but they don't yet know what they are.
And the common complaint that "I don't have time 
to ____" (fill in the blank) is understandable becau se many pro- 
jects seem overwhelming—and are overwhelming because you 
can't do a project at all! You can only do an action related  to it. 
Many actions require only a minute or two, in the a ppropriate 
context, to move a project forward. 
In training and coaching thousands of professionals , I have 
found that lack of time is not the major issue for them (though 
they themselves may think it is); the real problem is a 
lack of clarity and definition about what a project
really is, and what the associated next-action step s 
required are. Clarifying things on the front end, 
when they first appear on the radar, rather than on
the back end, after trouble has developed, allows 
people to reap the benefits of managing action. 
The Value of a Bottom-Up Approach 
I have discovered over the years the practical valu e of working on 
personal productivity improvement from the bottom u p, starting 
with the most mundane, ground-floor level of curren t activity and 
commitments. Intellectually, the most appropriate w ay ought to be 
to work from the top down, first uncovering persona l and corpo- 
rate missions, then defining critical objectives, a nd finally focus- 
ing on the details of implementation. The trouble i s, however, 
19 The beginning 
is half of every 
action. 
—Greek 
Things rarely get 
stuck because of 
lack of time. They get 
stuck because the 
doing of them has 
not been defined. 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE 
that most people are so embroiled in commitments on  a day-to- 
day level that their ability to focus successfully on the larger hori- 
zon is seriously impaired. Consequently, a bottom-u p approach is 
usually more effective. 
Getting current on and in control of what's in your  in-basket 
and on your mind right now, and incorporating pract ices that can 
help you stay that way, will provide the best means of broadening
your horizons. A creative, buoyant energy will be u nleashed that 
will better support your focus on new heights, and your confidence 
will increase to handle what that creativity produc es. An immedi- 
ate sense of freedom, release, and inspiration natu rally comes to 
people who roll up their sleeves and implement this  process. 
You'll be better equipped to undertake higher-focus ed 
thinking when your tools for handling the resulting  actions 
for implementation are part of your ongoing operati onal style. 
There are more meaningful things to think about tha n your in- 
basket, but if your management of that level is not  as 
efficient as it could be, it's like trying to swim in 
baggy clothing. 
Many executives I have worked with during the 
day to clear the decks of their mundane "stuff" hav e 
spent the following evening having a stream of idea s 
and visions about their company and their future. 
This happens as an automatic consequence of 
unsticking their workflow. 
Horizontal and Vertical Action Management 
You need to control commitments, projects, and acti ons in two 
ways—horizontally and vertically. "Horizontal" cont rol 
maintains 
coherence across all the activities in which you ar e involved. 
Imagine your psyche constantly scanning your enviro nment like 
police radar; it may land on any of a thousand diff erent items that 
invite or demand your attention during any twenty-f our-hour 
period: the drugstore, the housekeeper, your aunt M artha, the 
strategic plan, lunch, a wilting plant in the offic e, an upset cus- 
20 Vision is not 
enough; it must be 
combined with 
venture. It is not 
enough to stare up 
the steps; we must 
step up the stairs. 
—Vaclav Havel 
CHAPTER 1 | A NEW PRACTICE FOR A NEW REALITY 
tomer, shoes that need shining. You have to buy sta mps, deposit 
that check, make the hotel reservation, cancel a st aff meeting, see 
a movie tonight. You might be surprised at the volu me of things 
you actually think about and have to deal with just  in one day. You 
need a good system that can keep track of as many o f them as pos- 
sible, supply required information about them on de mand, and 
allow you to shift your focus from one thing to the  next quickly 
and easily. 
"Vertical" control, in contrast, manages thinking u p and 
down the track of individual topics and projects. F or example, 
your inner "police radar" lands on your next vacati on as you and 
your spouse talk about it over dinner—where and whe n you'll go, 
what you'll do, how to prepare for the trip, and so  on. Or you and 
your boss need to make some decisions about the new  depart- 
mental reorganization you're about to launch. Or yo u just need to 
get your thinking up to date on the customer you're  about to call. 
This is "project planning" in the broad sense. It's  focusing in on a 
single endeavor, situation, or person and fleshing out whatever 
ideas, details, priorities, and sequences of events  may be required 
for you to handle it, at least for the moment. 
The goal for managing horizontally and vertically i s the 
same: to get things off your mind and get things do ne. Appropri- 
ate action management lets you feel comfortable and  in control as 
you move through your broad spectrum of work and li fe, while 
appropriate project focusing gets you clear about a nd on track 
with the specifics needed. 
The Major Change: Getting It All Out of Your Head 
There is no real way to achieve the kind of relaxed
control I'm promising if you keep things only in yo ur 
head. As you'll discover, the individual behaviors 
described in this book are things you're already 
doing. The big difference between what I do and 
what others do is that I capture and organize 100 
percent of my "stuff" in and with objective tools at There is usually an 
inverse proportion 
between how much 
something is on 
your mind and how 
much it's getting 
done.
21 
THE ART OF GETTING THINGS DONE  |  PART ONE 
hand, not in my mind. And that applies to everything —little or big, 
personal or professional, urgent or not. Everything . 
I'm sure that at some time or other you've gotten t o a place in 
a project, or in your life, where you just had to sit down and make a 
list. If so, you have a reference point for what I'm talk ing about. 
Most people, however, do that kind of list-making d rill only when 
the confusion gets too unbearable and they just have to do some- 
thing about it. They usually make a list only about  the specific 
area that's bugging them. But if you made that kind  of review a 
characteristic of your ongoing life- and work style , and you main- 
tained it across all areas of your life (not just t he most "urgent"), 
you'd be practicing the kind of "black belt" manage ment style I'm 
describing. 
I try to make intuitive choices based on my 
options, instead of trying to think about what thos e 
options are. I need to have thought about all of that 
already and captured the results in a trusted way. I 
don't want to waste time thinking about things more
than once. That's an inefficient use of creative en ergy 
and a source of frustration and stress. 
And you can't fudge this thinking. Your mind will k eep 
working on anything that's still in that undecided state. But 
there's a limit to how much unresolved "stuff" it c an contain 
before it blows a fuse. 
The short-term-memory part of your mind—the part th at 
tends to hold all of the incomplete, undecided, and  unorganized 
"stuff"—functions much like RAM on a personal compu ter. Your 
conscious mind, like the computer screen, is a focu sing tool, not a 
storage place. You can think about only two or thre e things at once. 
But the incomplete items are still being stored in the short-term- 
memory space. And as with RAM, there's limited capa city; there's 
only so much "stuff" you can store in there and sti ll have that part of 
your brain function at a high level. Most people wa lk around with 
their RAM bursting at the seams. They're constantly  distracted, 
their focus disturbed by their own internal mental overload. 
22 There is no reason 
ever to have the 
same thought twice, 
unless you like 
having that thought. 
CHAPTER 1   I  A NEW PRACTICE FOR ANEW REALITY 
For example, in the last few minutes, has your mind  wan- 
dered off into some area that doesn't have anything  to do with 
what you're reading here? Probably. And most likely  where your 
mind went was to some open loop, some incomplete si tuation 
that you have some investment in. All that situatio n did was rear 
up out of the RAM part of your brain and yell at yo u, internally. 
And what did you do about it? Unless you wrote it d own and put 
it in a trusted "bucket" that you know you'll revie w appropriately 
sometime soon, more than likely you worried about it. Not the 
most effective behavior: no progress was made, and 
tension was increased. 
The big problem is that your mind keeps 
reminding you of things when you can't do anything 
about them. It has no sense of past or future. That
means that as soon as you tell yourself that you ne ed 
to do something, and store it in your RAM, there's a 
part of you that thinks you should be doing that so mething all the 
time. Everything you've told yourself you ought to do, it  thinks 
you should be doing right now. Frankly, as soon as you have two 
things to do stored in your RAM, you've generated p ersonal 
failure, because you can't do them both at the same  time. This 
produces an all-pervasive stress factor whose sourc e can't be pin- 
pointed. 
Most people have been in some version of this menta l stress 
state so consistently, for so long, that they don't  even know they're 
in it. Like gravity, it's ever-present—so much so that  those who 
experience it usually aren't even aware of the pres sure. The only 
time most of them will realize how much tension the y've been 
under is when they get rid of it and notice how dif ferent they feel. 
Can you get rid of that kind of stress? You bet. Th e rest of 
this book will explain how. 
23 It  is hard to fight 
an enemy who has 
outposts in your 
head. 
—Sally Kempton