Getting Started: Setting Up 
the Time, Space, and Tools 
IN PART 2 we'll move from a conceptual framework and limite d 
application of workflow mastery to full-scale imple mentation and 
best practices. Going through this program often gi ves people a 
level of relaxed control they may never have experi enced before, 
but it usually requires the catalyst of step-by-ste p procedures to 
get there. To that end, I'll provide a logical sequ ence of things to 
do, to make it as easy as possible for you to get o n board and glean 
the most value from these techniques. 
Implementation—Whether Ail-Out or 
Casual—Is a Lot About "Tricks" 
If you're not sure you're committed to an all-out i mplementation 
of these methods, let me assure you that a lot of t he value people 
get from this material is good "tricks." Sometimes 
just one good trick can make it worthwhile to range
through this information: I've had people tell me, for 
example, that the best thing they got from my two- 
day seminar was advice on setting up and using a 
tickler file. Tricks are for the not-so-smart, not- so- 
conscious part of us. To a great degree, the highes t- 
performing people I know are those who have 
installed the best tricks in their lives. I know th at's 
85 It is easier to act 
yourself into a 
better way of 
feeling than to feel 
yourself into a 
better way of 
action. 
—0. H. Mowrer 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWO 
true of me. The smart part of us sets up things for  us to do that the 
not-so-smart part responds to almost automatically,  creating 
behavior that produces high-performance results. We  trick our- 
selves into doing what we ought to be doing. 
For instance, if you're a semiregular exerciser lik e me, you 
probably have your own little tricks to get you to exercise. My best 
trick is costume —the clothing I put on or take off. If I put on exe r- 
cise gear, I'll start to feel like exercising; if I  don't, I'm very likely 
to feel like doing something else. 
Let's look at an example of a real productivity tri ck. You've 
probably taken work home that you had to bring back the next 
day, right? It was mission-critical that you not fo rget it the next 
morning. So where did you put it the night before? Did you put it 
in front of the door, or on your keys, so you'd be sure to take it 
with you? For this you got a higher education? What  a sophisti- 
cated piece of self-management technology you've in stalled in 
your life! But actually that's just what it is. The  smart part of you 
the night before knows that the not-so-smart part o f you first 
thing in the morning may barely be conscious. "What 's this in 
front of the door!? Oh, that's right, I've got to t ake this with me!" 
What a class act. But really, it is. It's a trick I  call Put It in 
Front of the Door. For our purposes the "door" is g oing to be the 
door of your mind, not your house. But it's the sam e idea. 
If you were to take out your calendar right now and  look 
closely at every single item for the next fourteen 
days, you'd probably come up with at least one "Oh- 
that-reminds-me-I-need-to_____________ ." If you 
then cap- 
tured that value-added thought into some place that
would trigger you to act, you'd feel better already , 
have a clearer head, and get more positive things 
done. It's not rocket science, just a good trick. 
If you take out a clean sheet of paper right now, 
along with your favorite writing instrument, and fo r 
three minutes focus solely on the most awesome proj - 
ect on your mind, I guarantee you'll have at least one 
86 You increase 
your productivity 
and creativity 
exponentially when 
you think about the 
right things at the 
right time and have 
the tools to capture 
your value-added 
thinking. 
CHAPTER 4 |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND  TOOLS 
"Oh, yeah, I need to consider __." Then capture what  shows up 
in your head on the piece of paper and put it where  you might 
actually use the idea or information. You won't be one ounce 
smarter than you were ten minutes ago, but you'll h ave added 
value to your work and life. 
Much of learning how to manage workflow in a "black  belt" 
way is about laying out the gear and practicing the  moves so that 
the requisite thinking happens more automatically a nd it's a lot 
easier to get engaged in the game. The suggestions that follow 
about getting time, space, and tools in place are a ll trusted meth- 
ods for making things happen at a terrific new leve l. 
If you're sincere about making a major leap forward  in your 
personal management systems, I recommend that you p ay close 
attention to the details and follow through on the suggestions 
provided below in their entirety. The whole will be  greater than 
the sum of the parts. You'll also discover that the  execution of this 
program will produce real progress on real things t hat are going 
on in your life right now. We'll get lots done that  you want to get 
done, in new and efficient ways that may amaze you.
Setting Aside the Time 
I recommend that you create a block of time to init ialize this 
process and prepare a workstation with the appropri ate space, fur- 
niture, and tools. If your space is properly set up  and streamlined, 
it can reduce your unconscious resistance to dealin g with your 
stuff and even make it attractive for you to sit down and crank 
through your input and your work. An ideal time fra me for most 
people is two whole days, back to back. (Don't be p ut off by that if 
you don't have that long to spend, though: doing an y of the activi- 
ties I suggest will be useful, no matter how much o r how little 
time you devote to them. Two days are not required to benefit 
from these techniques and principles—they will star t to pay off 
almost instantly.) Implementing the full collection  process can 
87 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWO 
take up to six hours or more, and processing and de ciding on 
actions for all the input you'll want to externaliz e and capture into 
your system can easily take another eight hours. Of  course you 
can also collect and process your stuff in chunks, but it'll be much 
easier if you can tackle that front-end portion in one fell swoop. 
The ideal time for me to work with a professional i s on a 
weekend or holiday because the chance of outside di sturbance is 
minimal then. If I work with someone on a typical w orkday, we 
first make sure that no meetings are scheduled and only emer- 
gency interruptions are allowed; phone calls are ro uted to voice- 
mail, or logged by secretaries for review and handl ing during a 
break. I don't recommend using "after hours" for th is work. It usu- 
ally means seriously reduced horsepower and a big t endency to 
get caught up in "rabbit trails." * 
For many of the executives I work with, holding the  world back 
for two contiguous days is the hardest part of the whole process—
the perceived necessity to be constantly available for meetings and 
communications when they're "at work" is difficult for them to let go 
of. That's why we often resort to weekends. If you work in an open 
cubicle or office, it will be even more of a challe nge to isolate suffi- 
cient time blocks on a regular workday during offic e hours. 
It's not that the procedure itself is so "sacred"; it's just that it 
takes a lot of psychic energy to collect and proces s 
such a large inventory of open loops, especially wh en 
they've been "open," "undecided," or "stuck" for wa y 
too long. Interruptions can double the time it take s 
to get through everything. If you can get to ground
zero in one contained time period, it gives you a h uge 
sense of control and accomplishment and frees up a 
reservoir of energy and creativity. Later on you ca n 
88 *After hours is actually a good time to crank throu gh a group of similar tasks 
that you wouldn't normally do in the course of your  typical workday, like 
filing 
a big backlog of papers, organizing photographs, su rfing the Web about your 
upcoming vacation location, or processing expense r eceipts. Dedicate two days 
to this process, and 
it will be worth 
many times that in 
terms of your 
productivity and 
mental health. 
CHAPTER 4  |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND  TOOLS 
maintain your system in shorter spurts around and " between the 
lines" of you regular day. 
Setting Up the Space 
You'll need a physical location to serve as a centr al cockpit of con- 
trol. If you already have a desk and office space s et up where you 
work, that's probably the best place to start. If y ou work from a 
home office, obviously that will be your prime location. If you 
already have both, you'll want to establish identic al, even inter- 
changeable systems in both places. 
The basics for a work space are just a writing surf ace and 
room for an in-basket. Some people, such as a forem an in a 
machine shop, an intake nurse on a hospital floor, or your chil- 
dren's nanny, won't need much more than that. The w riting sur- 
face will of course expand for most professionals, to include a 
phone, a computer, stacking trays, working file dra wers, reference 
shelves. Some may feel the need for a fax, a printe r, a VCR, and/ 
or multimedia conferencing equipment. The seriously  self- 
contained will also want gear for exercise, leisure , and hobbies. 
A functional work space is critical. If you don't a lready have a 
dedicated work space and in-basket, get them now. T hat goes for 
students, homemakers, and retirees, too. Everyone m ust have a 
physical locus of control from which to deal with e verything else. 
If I had to set up an emergency workstation in just  a few 
minutes, I would buy a door, put it on top of two t wo-drawer fil- 
ing cabinets (one at each end), place three stack-b askets on it, and 
add a legal pad and pen. That would be my home base  (if I had 
time to sit down, I'd also buy a stool!). Believe i t or not, I've been 
in several executive offices that wouldn't be as fu nctional. 
If You Go to an Office, You'll Still Need a Space a t Home 
Don't skimp on work space at home. As you'll discov er through 
this process, it's critical that you have at least a satellite home 
89 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
system identical to the one in your office. Many pe o- 
ple I've worked with have been somewhat embar- 
rassed by the degree of chaos that reigns in their 
homes, in contrast to their offices at work; they'v e 
gotten tremendous value from giving themselves 
permission to establish the same setup in both plac es. 
If you're like many of them, you'll find that a wee k- 
end spent setting up a home workstation can make a revolution- 
ary change in your ability to organize your life. 
An Office Space in Transit 
If you move around much, as a business traveler or jus t as a person 
with a mobile life-style, you'll also want to set u p an efficiently 
organized micro-office-in-transit. More than likely  this will con- 
sist of a briefcase, pack, or satchel with appropri ate folders and 
portable workstation supplies. 
Many people lose opportunities to be productive bec ause 
they're not equipped to take advantage of the odd m oments and 
windows of time that open up as they move from one place to 
another, or when they're in off-site environments. The combina- 
tion of a good processing style, the right tools, a nd good intercon- 
nected systems at home and at work can make traveli ng a highly 
leveraged way to get certain kinds of work done. 
Don't Share Space! 
It is imperative that you have your own work space—or at least your 
own in-basket and a physical place in which to proc ess paper. Too 
many married couples I've worked with have tried to  work out of a 
single desk at home, and it always makes light-year s of difference 
when they expand to two workstations. Far from bein g the "separa- 
tion" they expect, the move in fact relieves them o f a subtle stress in 
their relationship about managing the stuff of thei r shared lives. 
One couple even decided to set up an additional min i-workstation 
in the kitchen for the stay-at-home mom, so she cou ld process 
work while keeping an eye on their infant in the fa mily room. 
90 You must have a 
focused work 
space—at home, 
at 
work, and if 
possible even in 
CHAPTER 4  |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND  TOOLS 
Some organizations are interested in the concept of  "hotel- 
ing"—that is, having people create totally self-con tained and 
mobile workstation capabilities so they can "plug i n" anywhere in 
the company, at any time, and work from there. I ha ve my doubts 
about how well that concept will work in practice. A friend who 
was involved in setting up an "office of the future " model in Wash- 
ington, D.C., for the U.S. government, claimed that  hoteling 
tended to fall apart because of the "Mine!" factor— people wanted 
their own stuff. I suggest there's a deeper reason for the fa ilure: there 
needs to be zero resistance at the less-than-consci ous level for us to 
use the systems we have. Having to continually reinvent  our in- 
basket, our filing system, and how and where we pro cess our stuff 
can only be a source of incessant distraction. 
You can work virtually everywhere if you have a 
clean, compact system and know how to process your 
stuff rapidly and portably. But you'll still need a
"home base" with a well-grooved set of tools and 
sufficient space for all the reference and support 
material that you'll want somewhere close at hand 
when you "land." Most people I work with need at 
least four file drawers for their general-reference  and project- 
support types of paper-based materials—and it's har d to imagine 
that all of that could ever be totally and easily m ovable. 
Getting the Tools You'll Need 
If you're committed to a full implementation of thi s workflow 
process, there are some basic supplies and equipmen t that you'll 
need to get you started. As you go along, you're li kely to dance 
between using what you're used to and evaluating th e possibilities 
for new and different gear to work with. 
Note that good tools don't necessarily have to be e xpensive. 
Often, on the low-tech side, the more "executive" s omething 
looks, the more dysfunctional it really is. 
91 It is critical that you 
have your own 
work space. You 
want to use your 
systems, not just
think about them.
92 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWO 
The Basic Processing Tools 
Let's assume you're starting from scratch. In addit ion to a desktop 
work space, you'll need: 
• Paper-holding trays (at least three) 
• A stack of plain letter-size paper 
• A pen/pencil 
•Post-its (3X3s) 
• Paper clips 
• Binder clips 
• A stapler and staples 
• Scotch tape 
• Rubber bands 
• An automatic labeler 
• File folders 
• A calendar 
• Wastebasket/recycling bins 
Paper-Holding Trays 
These will serve as your in-basket and out-basket, with one or 
two others for work-in-progress support papers and/ or your "read 
and review" stack. The most functional trays are th e side-facing 
letter or legal stackable kinds, which have no "lip " on them to 
keep you from sliding out a single piece of paper. 
Plain Paper 
You'll use plain paper for the initial collection p rocess. Believe it 
or not, putting one thought on one full-size sheet of paper can 
have enormous value. Although most people will wind  up pro- 
cessing their notes into some sort of list organize r, a few will actu- 
ally stick with the simple piece-of-paper-per-thoug ht system. In 
any case, it's important to have plenty of letter-s ize writing paper 
or tablets around to make capturing ad hoc input ea sy. 
CHAPTER 4  |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND  TOOLS 
Post-its, Clips, Stapler, Etc. 
Post-its, clips, stapler, tape, and rubber bands wi ll 
come in handy for routing and storing paper-based 
materials. We're not finished with paper yet (if yo u 
haven't noticed!), and the simple tools for managin g 
it are essential. 
The Labeler 
The labeler is a surprisingly critical tool in our work. 
Thousands of executives and professionals and homem akers I 
have worked with now have their own automatic label ers, and my 
archives are full of their comments, like, "Incredi ble—I wouldn't 
have believed what a difference it makes!" The labe ler will be used 
to label your file folders, binder spines, and nume rous other 
things. 
At this writing, I recommend the Brother labeler—it 's the 
most user-friendly. Get the least expensive one tha t sits on a desk 
and has an AC adapter (so you won't have to worry a bout batter- 
ies). Also get a large supply of cassettes of label  tape—black letters 
on white tape (instead of clear) are much easier to  read and allow 
you to relabel folders you might want to reuse. 
You can get software and printer sheets to make com puter- 
generated labels, but I prefer the stand-alone tool . If you have to 
wait to do your filing or labeling as a batch job, you'll most likely 
resist making files for single pieces of paper, and  it'll add the for- 
mality factor, which really puts the brakes on this  system. 
File Folders 
You'll need plenty of file folders (get letter size  if you can, legal 
size if you must). You may also need an equal numbe r of 
Pendaflex-style file-folder hangers, if your filing  system requires 
them. Plain manila folders are fine—color-coding is  a level of 
complexity that's hardly ever worth the effort. You r general- 
reference filing system should just be a simple lib rary. 
93 Moment-to-moment
collecting, thinking,
processing, and 
organizing are 
challenging enough;
always ensure that
you have the tools 
to make them as 
easy as possible.
94 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWO 
Calendar 
Although you may not need a calendar just to collec t your incom- 
plete items, you'll certainly come up with actions that need to be 
put there, too. As I noted earlier, the calendar sh ould be used 
not 
to hold action lists but to track the "hard landsca pe" of things 
that 
have to get done on a specific day or at a specific time . 
Most professionals these days already have some sor t of 
working calendar system in place, ranging from pock et week-at- 
a-glance booklets, to loose-leaf organizers with da y-, week-, 
month-, and year-at-a-glance options, to single-use r software 
organizers, to group-ware calendars used companywid e, like Out- 
look or Lotus Notes. 
The calendar has often been the central tool that p eople 
rely 
on to "get organized." It's certainly a critical co mponent in man- 
aging particular kinds of data and reminders of the  commitments 
that relate to specific times and days. There are m any reminders 
and some data that you will want a calendar for, bu t you won't be 
stopping there: your calendar will need to be integ rated with a 
much more comprehensive system that will emerge as you apply 
this method. 
You may wonder what kind of calendar would be best for you 
to use, and I'll discuss that in more detail in the  next chapter. For 
now, just keep using the one you've got. After you develop a feel 
for the whole systematic approach, you'll have a be tter reference 
point for deciding about graduating to a different tool. 
Wastebasket/Recycling Bins 
If you're like most people, you're going to toss a lot more stuff 
than you expect, so get ready to create a good bit of trash. Some 
executives I have coached have found it extremely u seful to 
arrange for a large Dumpster to be parked immediate ly outside 
their offices the day we work together! 
CHAPTER 4  |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND  TOOLS 
Do You Need an Organizer? 
Whether or not you'll need an organizer will depend  on a number 
of factors. Are you already committed to using one?  How do you 
want to see your reminders of actions, agendas, and  projects? 
Where and how often might you need to review them? Because 
your head is not the place in which to hold things, 
you'll obviously need something to manage your trig- 
gers externally. You could maintain everything in a
purely low-tech fashion, by keeping pieces of paper
in folders. Or you could even use a paper-based not e- 
book or planner, or a digital version thereof. Or y ou 
could even employ some combination of these. 
All of the low-tech gear listed in the previous 
section is used for various aspects of collecting, processing, and 
organizing. You'll use a tray and random paper for collecting. As 
you process your in-basket, you'll complete many le ss-than-two- 
minute actions that will require Post-its, a staple r, and paper clips. 
The magazines, articles, and long memos that are yo ur longer- 
than-two-minute reading will go in another of the t rays. And 
you'll probably have quite a bit just to file. What 's left—maintain- 
ing a project inventory, logging calendar items and  action and 
agenda reminders, and tracking the things you're wa iting for—
will require some form of lists, or reviewable groupings of similar 
items. 
Lists can be managed simply in a low-tech way, as p ieces of 
paper kept in a file folder (e.g., separate sheets/ notes for each per- 
son you need to call in a "Calls" file), or they ca n be arranged in a 
more "mid-tech" fashion, in loose-leaf notebooks or  planners (a 
page titled "Calls" with the names listed down the sheet). Or they 
can be high-tech, digital versions of paper lists ( such a "Calls" 
category in the "To Do" section of a Palm PDA or in  Microsoft 
Outlook "Tasks"). 
In addition to holding portable reference material (e.g., 
telephone/address info), most organizers are design ed for managing 
95 Once you know how 
to process your 
stuff and what to 
organize, you really 
just need to create 
and manage lists.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWO 
lists. (Your calendar is actually a form of a list— with time- and 
day-specific action reminders listed chronologicall y.) Probably 
thousands of types of organizers have been on the m arket since the 
1980s, from the early rash of pocket Day-Timers to the current 
flood of high-tech personal digital assistants (PDA s) and PC- 
based software products like Microsoft Outlook and Lotus Notes. 
Should you implement the Getting Things Done 
process into what you're currently using, or should
you install something new? The answer is, do 
whichever one will actually help you change your 
behavior so you'll use the tools appropriately. The re 
are efficiency factors to consider here, too. Do yo u 
get a lot of digital information that would be easi er to 
track with a digital tool? Do you need a paper-base d 
calendar for all the appointments you have to make 
and change rapidly on the run? Do you need reminder s of things 
like calls you have to make when it's not easy to c arry file folders? 
And so on. There are also the aesthetic and enjoyme nt factors. 
I've done some of my best planning and updating for  myself when 
I simply wanted some excuse to use (i.e., play with ) my Palm 
organizer while waiting for dinner in a restaurant!
When considering whether to get and use an organize r, and 
if so, which one, keep in mind that all you really need to do is 
manage lists. You've got to be able to create a lis t on the run and 
review it easily and as regularly as you need to. O nce you know 
what to put on the lists, and how to use them, the medium really 
doesn't matter. Just go for simplicity, speed, and fun. 
The Critical Factor of a Filing System 
A simple and highly functional personal reference 
system is critical to this process. The filing syst em at 
hand is the first thing I assess before beginning t he 
workflow process in anyone's office. As I noted in 
chapter 2, the lack of a good general-reference sys - 
tem can be one of the greatest obstacles to imple- 
96 One of the best 
tricks for enhancing 
your personal
productivity is 
having organizing 
tools that you love 
to use. 
If your filing system 
isn't fast, functional, 
and fun, you'll resist 
the whole process. 
CHAPTER 4  |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND  TOOLS 
menting a personal management system, and for most of the execu- 
tives I have personally coached, it represents one of the biggest 
opportunities for improvement. Many times I have dr iven to the 
local office-supply store with a client and bought a filing cabinet, 
a big stock of file folders, and a labeler, just so  we could create an 
appropriate place in which to put two-thirds of the  "stuff" lying 
around his/her desk and credenza and even on the of fice floors. 
We're concerned here mostly with general-reference filing—
as distinct from discrete filing systems devoted to  contracts, finan- 
cial information, or other categories of data that deserve their 
own place and indexing. General-reference files sho uld hold arti- 
cles, brochures, pieces of paper, notes, printouts,  faxes—basically 
anything that you want to keep for its interesting or useful data 
and that doesn't fit into your specialized filing s ystems and won't 
stand up by itself on a shelf (as will large softwa re manuals and 
seminar binders). 
If you have a trusted secretary or assistant who ma intains 
that system for you, so you can put a "File as X" P ost-it on the 
document and send it "out" to him or her, great. Bu t ask yourself if 
you still have some personally interesting or confi dential support 
material that should be accessible at any moment, e ven when your 
assistant isn't around. If so, you'll still need yo ur own system, 
either in your desk or right beside it somewhere. 
Success Factors for Filing 
I strongly suggest that you maintain your own perso nal, at-hand 
filing system. It should take you less than one min ute to pick 
something up out of your in-basket or print it from  e-mail, decide 
it needs no action but has some potential future va lue, and finish 
storing it in a trusted system. If it takes you lon ger than a minute 
to complete that sequence of actions, you have a si gnificant 
improvement opportunity, since you probably won't f ile the docu- 
ment; you'll stack it or stuff it instead. Besides being fast, the sys- 
tem needs to be fun and easy, current and complete.  Otherwise 
you'll unconsciously resist emptying your in-basket  because you 
97 
98 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWO 
know there's likely to be something in there that o ught to get filed, 
and you won't even want to look at the papers. Take  heart: I've seen 
people go from resisting to actually enjoying sorting through their 
stacks once their personal filing system is set up and humming. 
You must feel equally comfortable about filing a si ngle piece 
of paper on a new topic—even a scribbled note—in it s own file 
as 
you would about filing a more formal, larger docume nt. Because it 
requires so much work to make and organize files, p eople either 
don't keep them or have junked-up cabinets and draw ers full of all 
sorts of one-of-a-kind items, like a menu for the l ocal take-out 
cafe or the current train schedule. 
Whatever you need to do to get your reference syste m to that 
quick and easy standard for everything it has to ho ld, do it. My 
system works wonderfully for me and for many others  who try it, 
and I highly recommend that you consider incorporat ing all of 
the following guidelines to really make reference f iling automatic. 
Keep Your General-Reference Files at Hand's Reach Filing has to 
be instantaneous and easy. If you have to get up ev ery time you 
have some ad hoc piece of paper you want to file, y ou'll tend to 
stack it instead of filing it, and you're also like ly to just resist the 
whole in-basket process (because you subconsciously  know there's 
stuff in there that might need filing!). Many people I have 
coached have redesigned their office space so they have four 
general-reference file drawers literally in "swivel  distance," instead 
of across their room. 
One Alpha System I have one A—Z alphabetical filing system, not 
multiple systems. People have a tendency to want to  use their files 
as a personal organization system, and therefore th ey attempt to 
organize them by projects or areas of focus. This m agnifies geo- 
metrically the number of places something isn't when you forget 
where you filed it. One simple alpha system files e verything by 
topic, project, person, or company, so it can be in  only three or 
four places if you forget exactly where you put it.  You can usually 
CHAPTER 4  |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND  TOOLS 
put at least one subset of topics on each label, li ke "Gardening—
pots" and "Gardening—ideas." These would be filed u nder G. 
Currently I have four file drawers for my general-r eference 
files, and each is clearly marked on the outside—"A -E," "F-L," 
and so on—so I don't have to think about where some thing goes 
once it's labeled. 
Every once in a while someone has such a huge amoun t of 
reference material on one topic or project that it should be put in 
its own discrete drawer or cabinet. But if it is le ss than a half a file 
drawer's worth, I recommended including it in the s ingle general 
alphabetical system. 
Have Lots of Fresh Folders I keep a giant stack of fresh, new file 
folders instantly at hand and reachable from where I sit to process 
my in-basket. Nothing is worse than having somethin g to file and 
not having an abundance of folders to grab from to make the 
process easy. At any given time I want to have an i nventory of 
almost half a file drawer full of unused or reusabl e folders. Rule of 
thumb: reorder when the number drops below a hundre d. 
Keep the Drawer Less Than Three-Quarters Full Always try to 
keep your file drawers less than three-quarters ful l. If they're 
stuffed, you'll unconsciously resist putting things  in there, and ref- 
erence materials will tend to stack up instead. If a drawer is start- 
ing to get tight, I may purge it while I'm on hold on the phone. 
I know almost no one who doesn't have overstuffed f ile 
drawers. If you value your cuticles, and if you wan t to get rid of your 
unconscious resistance to filing, then you must kee p the drawers 
loose enough that you can insert and retrieve files  without effort. 
Some people's reaction to this is "I'd have to buy more file cabi- 
nets!" as if that were something horrible. Help me out here. If the 
stuff is worth keeping, it's worth keeping so that it's easily accessible, 
right? And if it's not, then why are you keeping it ? It's said that we're 
in the Information Age; if there's any validity to that, and if you're 
doing anything that hinders your usage of it... not smart. 
99 
100 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
You may need to create another tier of reference st orage to 
give yourself sufficient working room with your gen eral-reference 
files at hand. Material such as finished project no tes and "dead" 
client files may still need to be kept, but can be stored off-site or at 
least out of your work space. 
Label Your File Folders with an Auto Labeler Typeset labels change 
the nature of your files and your relationship to t hem. Labeled files 
feel comfortable on a boardroom table; everyone can  identify them; 
you can easily see what they are from a distance an d in your brief- 
case; and when you open your file drawers, you get to see what looks 
almost like a printed index of your files in alphab etical order. It 
makes it fun to open the drawer to find or insert t hings. 
Perhaps later in this new millennium the brain scie ntists will 
give us some esoteric and complex neurological expl anation for why 
labeled files work so effectively. Until then, trus t me. Get a labeler. 
And get your own. To make the whole system work without a hitch, 
you'll need to have it at hand all the time, so you can file something 
whenever you want. And don't share! If you have som ething to file 
and your labeler's not there, you'll just stack the  material instead of 
filing it. The labeler should be as basic a tool as  your stapler. 
Get High-Quality Mechanics File cabinets are not the place to 
skimp on quality. Nothing is worse than trying to o pen a heavy 
file drawer and hearing that awful screech! that happens when you 
wrestle with the roller bearings on one of those $2 9.95 "special 
sale" cabinets. You really need a file cabinet whos e drawer, even 
when it's three-quarters full, will glide open and click shut with 
the smoothness and solidity of a door on a German c ar. I'm not 
kidding. 
Get Rid of Hanging Files If You Can At the risk of seriously 
offending a lot of people who are already using han ging files, I 
recommend that you totally do away with the hanging -file hard- 
ware and use just plain folders standing up by them selves in the 
CHAPTER 4 |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND  TOOLS 
file drawer, held up by the movable metal plate in the back. Hang- 
ing folders are much less efficient because of the effort it takes to 
make a new file ad hoc and the formality that impos es on the fil- 
ing system. 
Here's an e-mail I received recently from a senior manager 
who actually took my advice after avoiding it for a  couple of years 
because of his investment in the hanging hardware: 
Your system is FANTASTIC!! I've completely redone m y files at 
home and at work —it only took a combined four days to do it, 
but I've done away with Pendaflex and have gone to t he manila 
folder system, with A-Z and nothing else. WOW! It's  so much 
easier. My desk for some reason is a lot neater, to o, without those 
stacks of "to be filed" stuff hanging around! 
But If You Can't ... Many people are stuck with 
the hanging-file system, at least at work, because 
side-opening hanging-folder filing cabinets have 
become standard corporate issue. If you have to wor k 
with hanging files, then I recommend that you: 
• Label the files, not the hangers. That lets you c arry 
the file folders for meetings and when traveling, 
without taking the hanger. In the fire zone of
real work, if it takes 
longer than sixty 
seconds to file 
something, you 
won't file, you'll
stack.
• Use only one file folder per hanger. This will keep the drawer visu- 
ally neat and prevent the weirdness that results wh en multiple 
files make a hanger uneven. Having to recalibrate f iles in an 
alpha system every time a folder gets full is too m uch trouble. 
• Keep a big supply of plain hangers and new file fol ders in the 
front of your first file drawer so you can make new  files and store 
them in a flash. 
101 
102 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
Purge Your Files at Least Once a Year Cleaning house in your files 
regularly keeps them from going stale and seeming l ike a black 
hole, and it also gives you the freedom to keep any thing on a 
whim "in case you might need it." You know everythi ng will be 
reassessed within a few months anyway, and you can redecide 
then what's worth keeping and what isn't. As I say,  I purge my 
files while I'm on hold on the phone (or marking ti me on a con- 
ference call that's dragging on and on!). 
I recommend that all organizations (if they don't h ave one 
already) establish a Dumpster Day, when all employe es get to 
come to work in sneakers and jeans, put their phone s on do-not- 
disturb, and get current with all their stored stuf f.* Dumpsters are 
brought in, and everyone has permission to spend th e whole day 
in purge mode. A personal Dumpster Day is an ideal thing to put 
into your tickler file, either during the holidays,  at year's end, or 
around early-spring tax-preparation time, when you might want 
to tie it in with archiving the previous year's fin ancial files. 
One Final Thing to Prepare . . . 
You've blocked off some time, you've gotten a work area set up, 
and you've got the basic tools to start implementin g the method- 
ology. Now what? 
If you've decided to commit a certain amount of tim e to set- 
ting up your workflow system, there's one more thin g that you'll 
need to do to make it maximally effective: you must  clear the 
decks of any other commitments for the duration of the session. 
If there's someone you absolutely need to call, or something 
your secretary has to handle for you or you have to  check with 
your spouse about, do it now. Or make an agreement with your- 
*A great time to do this is Christmas Eve Day, or s ome similar near-holiday 
that falls on a workday. Most people are in "party mode" anyway, so it's an ideal 
opportunity to get funky and clean house. 
CHAPTER 4  |  GETTING STARTED: SETTING UP THE TIME, SPACE, AND  TOOLS 
self about when you will do it, and then put some reminder of that 
where you won't miss it. It's critical that your fu ll psychic atten- 
tion be available for the work at hand. 
Almost without exception, when I sit down to begin coach- 
ing people, even though they've blocked out time an d committed 
significant money to utilize me as a resource for t hat time, they 
still have things they're going to have to do befor e we quit for the 
day, and they haven't arranged for them yet in thei r own systems. 
"Oh, yeah, I've got to call this client back someti me today," they'll 
say, or "I have to check in with my spouse to see i f he's gotten the 
tickets for tonight." It bespeaks a certain lack of  awareness and 
maturity in our culture, I think, that so many soph isticated people 
are ignoring those levels of responsibility to thei r own psyche, on 
an ongoing operational basis. 
So have you handled all that? Good. Now it's time t o gather 
representatives of all of your open loops into one place. 
103