PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWO 
on a conference call. But you must learn to dance 
among many tasks to keep a healthy balance of your 
workflow. Your choices will still have to be calibr ated 
against your own clarity about the nature and goals
of your work. 
Your ability to deal with surprise is your com- 
petitive edge. But at a certain point, if you're no t 
catching up and getting things under control, stayi ng 
busy with only the work at hand will undermine your
effectiveness. And ultimately, in order to know whe ther you 
should stop what you're doing and do something else , you'll need 
to have to have a good sense of what your job requi res and how 
that fits into the other contexts of your life. The  only way you can 
have that is to evaluate your life and work appropr iately at multi- 
ple horizons. 
The Six-Level Model for 
Reviewing Your Own Work 
The six levels of work as we saw in chapter 2 (page s 51-53) may 
be thought of in terms of altitude: 
• 50,000+feet: Life 
• 40,000 feet: Three- to five-year visions 
• 30,000 feet: One- to two-year goals 
• 20,000 feet: Areas of responsibility 
• 10,000 feet: Current projects 
• Runway: Current actions 
It makes sense that each of these levels should enh ance and 
align with the ones above it. In other words, your priorities will sit 
in a hierarchy from the top down. Ultimately, if th e phone call 
you're supposed to make clashes with your life purp ose or values, 
to be in sync with yourself you won't make it. If y our job structure 
200 Do ad hoc work as 
it shows up, not 
because it is the 
path of least resis- 
tance, but because 
it is the thing you 
need to do, vis-a-vis 
all the rest. 
CHAPTER 9  |  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES 
doesn't match up with where you need to be a year f rom now, 
you should rethink how you've framed your areas of focus and 
responsibilities, if you want to get where you're g oing most effi- 
ciently. 
Let's look at that first example from the bottom up . The 
phone call you need to make (action) is about the d eal you're 
working on (project), which would increase sales (r esponsibility). 
This particular deal would give you the opportunity  to move up in 
the sales force (job goal) because of the new marke t 
your company wants to penetrate (organization visio n). 
And that would get you closer to the way you want t o 
be living, both financially and professionally (lif e). 
Or, from the other direction, you've decided 
that you want to be your own boss and unlock some o f 
your unique assets and talents in a particular area  that 
resonates with you (life). So you create a business  for 
yourself (vision), with some short-term key operati onal objec- 
tives (job goal). That gives you some critical role s you need to 
fulfill to get it rolling (responsibility), with so me immediate 
outcomes to achieve (projects). On each of those pr ojects you'll 
have things you need to do, as soon as you can do t hem (next 
actions). 
The healthiest approach for relaxed control and ins pired 
productivity is to manage all the levels in a balan ced fashion. At 
any of these levels, it's critical to identify all the open loops, all the 
incompletions, and all the commitments that you hav e right now, 
as best you can. Without an acceptance and an objec tive assess- 
ment of what's true in the present, it's always dif ficult to cast off 
for new shores. What's on your answering machine? W hat are 
your projects relative to your kids? What are you r esponsible for in 
the office? What's pushing on you to change or attr acting you to 
create in the next months or years? These are all o pen loops in 
your psyche, though often it takes deeper and more introspective 
processes to identify the bigger goals and subtler inclinations. 
There is magic in being in the present in your life . I'm always 
201 Your work is to 
discover your work 
and then with all 
your heart to give 
yourself to it. 
—
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWO 
amazed at the power of clear observation simply 
about what's going on, what's true. Finding out the
exact details of your personal finances, clarifying  the 
historical data about the company you're buying, or
getting the facts about who really said what to who m 
in an interpersonal conflict can be constructive, i f not 
downright healing. 
Getting things done, and feeling good about it, mea ns being 
willing to recognize, acknowledge, and appropriatel y manage all 
the things that have your consciousness engaged. Ma stering the 
art of stress-free productivity requires it. 
Working from the Bottom Up 
In order to create productive alignment in your lif e, you could quite 
reasonably start with a clarification from the top down. Decide why 
you're on the planet. Figure out what kind of life and 
work and life-style would best allow you to fulfill  that 
contract. What kind of job and personal relationshi ps 
would support that direction? What key things would
you need to put in place and make happen right now,
and what could you do physically as soon as possibl e, 
to kick-start each of those? 
In truth, you can approach your priorities from 
any level, at any time. I always have something tha t I 
could do constructively to enhance my awareness and  focus on 
each level. I'm never lacking in more visions to el aborate, goals to 
reassess, projects to identify or create, or action s to decide on. The 
trick is to learn to pay attention to the ones you need to at the 
appropriate time, to keep you and your systems in b alance. 
Because everything will ultimately be driven by the  priorities 
of the level above it, any formulation of your prio rities would 
obviously most efficiently begin at the top. For ex ample, if you 
spend time prioritizing your work and then later di scover that it's 
not the work you think you ought to be doing, you m ay have 
"wasted" time and energy that could have been bette r spent defin- 
202 The best place to 
succeed is where 
you are with what 
you have. 
—Charles 
You're never lacking 
in opportunities to 
clarify your 
priorities at any 
level. Pay attention 
to which horizon is 
calling you. 
CHAPTER 9 1  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES 
ing the next job you really want. The problem is th at without a 
sense of control at the implementation levels (curr ent projects and 
actions), and without inner trust in your own abili ty to manage 
those levels appropriately, trying to manage yourse lf from the top 
down often creates frustration. 
From a practical perspective, I suggest going 
from the bottom up instead. I've coached people 
from both directions, and in terms of lasting value , I 
can honestly say that getting someone in control of
the details of his or her current physical world, a nd 
then elevating the focus from there, has never 
missed. 
The primary reason to work from this bottom- 
up direction is that it clears the psychic decks to  begin with, 
allowing your creative attention to focus on the mo re meaningful 
and elusive visions that you may need to challenge yourself to 
identify. Also, this particular method has a high d egree of flexibil- 
ity and freedom, and it includes a thinking and org anizing prac- 
tice that is universal and effective no matter what  it's focused on. 
That makes it worth learning, no matter what the ac tual content 
you're dealing with at the moment may be. Change yo ur mind, 
and this process will help you adjust with maximum speed. And 
knowing that you have that ability will give you pe rmission to 
play a bigger game. It's truly empowering. 
While the "50,000-foot level" is obviously the most  important 
context within which to set priorities, experience has shown me 
that when we understand and implement all the levels of work 
in which we are engaged, especially the runway and 10,000-foot 
levels, we gain greater freedom and resources to do  the bigger 
work that we're all about. Although a bottom-up app roach is 
not a key conceptual priority, from a practical per spective it's 
a critical factor in achieving a balanced, producti ve, and comfort- 
able life. 
203 Trying to manage 
from the top down,
when the bottom is 
out of control, may 
be the least
effective approach.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
Runway The first thing to do is make sure your action list s are 
complete, which in itself can be quite a task. Thos e who focus on 
gathering and objectifying all of those items disco ver that there 
are many they've forgotten, misplaced, or just not recognized. 
Aside from your calendar, if you don't have at leas t fifty next 
actions and waiting-fors, including all the agendas  for people and 
meetings, I would be skeptical about whether you re ally had all of 
them. If you've followed through rigorously with th e steps and 
suggestions in part 2, though, you may have them al ready. If not, 
and you do want to get this level up-to-date, set a side some time 
to work through chapters 4 through 6 in real implem entation 
mode. 
When you've finished getting this level of control current, 
you'll automatically have a more grounded sense of immediate 
priorities, which is almost impossible to achieve o therwise. 
10,000 Feet Finalize your "Projects" list. Does it 
truly capture all the commitments you have that wil l 
require more than one action to get done? That will
define the boundaries of the kind of week-to-week 
operational world you're in and allow you to relax 
your thinking for longer intervals. 
If you make a complete list of all of the things 
you want to have happen in your life and work at th is 
level, you'll discover that there are actions you n eed 
to do that you hadn't realized. Just creating this objective inven- 
tory will give you a firmer basis on which to make decisions about 
what to do when you have discretionary time. Invari ably when 
people get their "Projects" list up-to-date, they d iscover there are 
several things that could be done readily to move t hings they care 
about forward. 
Very few people have this clear data defined and av ailable to 
themselves in some objective form. Before any discu ssion about 
what should be done this afternoon can take place, this informa- 
tion must be at hand. 
204 Taking the inventory 
of your current 
work at all levels 
will automatically 
produce greater 
focus, alignment, 
and sense of 
priorities. 
CHAPTER 9  |  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES 
Again, if you've been putting into practice the met hodology 
of Getting Things Done, your "Projects" list will be where it needs 
to be. For most of our coaching clients, it takes t en to fifteen 
hours of collecting, processing, and organizing to get to the point 
of trusting the thoroughness of their inventory. 
20,000 Feet This is the level of "current job responsibilities. " 
What are the "hats" you wear? Professionally, this would relate to 
your current position and work. Personally, it woul d include the 
roles you've taken on in your family, in your commu nity, and of 
course with yourself as a functioning person. 
You may have some of these roles already defined an d 
written out. If you've recently taken a new positio n and there's 
an agreement or contract about your areas of respon sibility, 
 that would certainly be a good start. If you've do ne any kind 
of personal goal-setting and values-clarifying exer cises in the 
past and still have any materials you created then,  add those to the 
mix. 
Next I recommend that you make and keep a list call ed 
"Areas of Focus." You might like to separate this i nto "Profes- 
sional" and "Personal" sublists, in which case you' ll want to use 
them both equally for a consistent review This is o ne of the most 
useful checklists you can create for your own self- management. It 
won't require the kind of once-a-week recalibration
that the "Projects" list will; more likely it will have 
meaning on a longer recursion cycle. Depending on 
the speed of change in some of the more important 
areas of your life and work, this should be used as  a 
trigger for potential new projects every one to thr ee 
months. 
You probably have somewhere between four and seven key 
areas of responsibility in your work, and a similar  number person- 
ally. Your job may include things like staff develo pment, systems 
design, long-range planning, administrative support , marketing, 
and scheduling, or responsibility for facilities, f ulfillment, quality 
205 If you're not totally 
sure what your job 
is, it will always feel
overwhelming.
206 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PAHT TWO 
control, asset management, and so on. If you're you r own busi- 
ness, your attention will be on many more areas tha n if you have a 
very specialized function in a large organization. The rest of your 
life might entail areas of focus such as parenting,  partnering, 
church, health, community service, home management,  financial 
management, self-development, creative expression, and so forth. 
The operational purpose of the "Areas of Focus" lis t is to 
ensure that you have all your projects and next act ions defined, so 
you can manage your responsibilities appropriately.  If you were to 
create an accounting of those and evaluate them obj ectively, in 
terms of what you're doing and should be doing, you 'll undoubtedly 
uncover projects you need to add to your "Projects"  list. You may, in 
reviewing the list, decide that some areas are just  fine and are being 
taken care of. Then again, you may realize that som ething has been 
"bugging" you in one area and that a project should  be created to 
shore it up. "Areas of Focus" is really just a more  abstract and refined 
version of the "Triggers" list we covered earlier. 
Every client I have coached in the last twenty year s has 
uncovered at least one important gap at this level of discussion. 
For instance, a common "hat" a manager or executive  wears is 
"staff development." Upon reflection, most realize they need to add 
a project or two in that area, such as "Upgrade our  performance- 
review process." 
A discussion of "priorities" would have to incorpor ate all of 
these levels of current agreements between yourself  and others. If 
you get this "job description" checklist in play an d keep it current, 
you'll probably be more relaxed and in control than  most people 
in our culture. It will certainly go a long way tow ard moving you 
from hope to trust as you make the necessary on-the -run choices 
about what to do. 
30,000 to 50,000+ Feet Whereas the three lower levels have 
mostly to do with the current state of things—your actions, proj- 
ects, and areas of responsibility—from here up the factors of the 
future and your direction and intentions are primar y. There is still 
CHAPTER 9  I  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES 
an inventory to take at these plateaus, but it's mo re 
about "What is true right now about where I've 
decided I'm going and how I'm going to get there?" 
This can range from one-year goals in your job 
("30,000 feet") to a three-year vision for your car eer 
and personal net worth ("40,000 feet") to intuiting
your life purpose and how to maximize its expressio n 
("50,000+ feet"). 
I'm blending the three uppermost levels together he re 
because situations often can't easily be pigeonhole d into one or 
another of these categories. Also, since Getting Things Done is 
more about the art of implementation than about how  to define 
goals and vision, I won't offer a rigorous examinat ion here. But by 
its very nature this investigation can broach poten tially deep and 
complex arenas, which could include business strate gy, organiza- 
tion development, career planning, and life directi on and values. 
For our purposes, the focus is on capturing what mo tivators 
exist for you in current reality that determine the  inventory of 
what your work actually is, right now. Whether your  directions 
and goals should be changed—based on deeper thinkin g, analysis, 
and intuition—could be another discussion. Even so,  there are 
probably some things you can identify right now tha t can help 
you get current in your own thinking about your wor k and what's 
important in it. 
If you were to intuitively frame a picture of what you think 
you might be doing twelve to eighteen months from n ow, or what 
the nature of your job will look like at that point , what would that 
trigger? At this level, which is subtler, there may  be things person- 
ally you need to let go of, and people and systems that may need 
to be developed to allow the transition. And as the  job itself is a 
moving target, given the shifting sands of the prof essional world 
these days, there may need to be projects defined t o ensure via- 
bility of the outputs in your area. 
In the personal arena, this is where you would want  to con- 
sider things like: "My career is going to stagnate unless I assert my 
207 When you're not
sure where you're 
going, you'll never 
know when enough 
is enough.
208 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWO 
own goals more specifically to my boss (or my boss' s boss)." Or 
"What new things are my children going to be doing next year, 
and what do I need to do differently because of tha t?" Or "What 
preparation do I need to ensure that I can deal wit h this health 
problem we've just uncovered?" 
Through a longer scope you might assess: How is you r career 
going? How is your personal life moving along? What  is your 
organization doing relative to changes in the envir onment, and 
what impact does that have on you? These are the on e-to-five- 
year-horizon questions that, when I ask them, elici t different and 
important kinds of answers from everyone. 
Not long ago I coached someone in a large internati onal 
bank who, after a few months of implementing this m ethodology 
and getting control of his day-to-day inventory of work, decided 
the time was right to invest in his own start-up hi gh-tech firm. 
The thought had been too intimidating for him to ad dress ini- 
tially, but working from the "runway level" up made  it much more 
accessible and a natural consequence of thinking at  this horizon. 
If you're involved in anything that has a future of  longer than 
a year (marriage, kids, a career, a company, an art  form), you would 
do well to think about what you might need to be do ing to man- 
age things along that vector. 
Questions to ask yourself here are: 
• What are the longer-term goals and objectives in my
organization, and what projects do I need to have i n place 
related to them to fulfill my responsibilities? 
• What longer-term goals and objectives have I set fo r myself, 
and what projects do I need to have in place to mak e them 
happen? 
• What other significant things are happening that co uld affect 
my options about what you I'm doing? 
CHAPTER 9  |  DOING: MAKING THE BEST ACTION CHOICES 
Here are some examples of the kinds of issues that show up 
at this level of conversation: 
• The changing nature of your job, given the shifting  priorities of 
the company. Instead of managing the production of your own 
training programs in-house, you're going to outsour ce them to 
vendors. 
• The direction in which you feel you need to move in  your 
career. You see yourself doing a different kind of job a year 
from now, and you need to make a transition out of the one 
you have while exploring the options for a transfer  or 
promotion. 
• The organization direction, given globalization and  expansion. 
You see a lot of major international travel looming  on the 
horizon for you, and given your life-style preferen ces, you need 
to consider how to readjust your career plans. 
• Life-style preferences and changing needs. As your kids get 
older, your need to be at home with them is diminis hing, and 
your interest in investment and retirement planning  is growing. 
At the topmost level of thinking, you'll need to as k some of 
the ultimate questions. Why does your company exist ? Why do 
you exist? What is the core DNA of your existence, pers onally 
and/or organizationally, that drives your choices. This is the "big 
picture" stuff with which hundreds of books and gur us and mod- 
els are devoted to helping you grapple. 
"Why?": this is the great question with which we al l struggle. 
You can have all the other levels of your life and work ship- 
shape, defined, and organized to a T. Still, if you 're the slightest 
bit off course in terms of what at the deepest leve l you want or are 
called to be doing, you're going to be uncomfortabl e. 
209 
210 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWO 
Getting Priority Thinking Off Your Mind 
Take at least a few minutes, if you haven't already  done so, to jot 
down some informal notes about things that occurred  to you 
while you've been reading this chapter. Whatever po pped into 
your mind at these more elevated levels of your inn er radar, write 
it down and get it out of your head. 
Then process those notes. Decide whether what you w rote 
down is something you really want to move on or not . If not, 
throw the note away, or put it on a "Someday/Maybe"  list or in a 
folder called "Dreams and Goals I Might Get Around to at Some 
Point." Perhaps you want to continue accumulating m ore of this 
kind of future thinking and would like to do the ex ercise with 
more formality—for example, by drafting a new busin ess plan 
with your partners, designing and writing out your idea of a 
dream life with your spouse, creating a more specif ic career map 
for the next three years for yourself, or just gett ing a personal 
coach who can lead you through those discussions an d thought 
processes. If so, put that outcome on your "Project s" list, and 
decide the next action. Then do it, hand it off to get done, or put 
the action reminder on the appropriate list. 
With that done, you may want to turn your focus to develop- 
mental thinking about specific projects that have b een identified 
but not fleshed out as fully as you'd like. You'll want to ensure that 
you're set up for that kind of "vertical" processin g. 
Getting Projects Under Control 
CHAPTERS 4 THROUGH 9 have given you all the tricks and methods you 
need to clear your head and make intuitive choices about what to 
do when. That's the horizontal level—what needs you r attention 
and action across the horizontal landscape of your life. The last 
piece of the puzzle is the vertical level—the diggi ng deep and pie- 
in-the-sky thinking that can leverage your creative  brainpower. 
That gets us back to refining and energizing our pr oject planning. 
The Need for More Informal Planning 
After years of working with thousands of profession als down in 
the trenches, I can safely say that virtually all o f us could be doing 
more planning, more informally and more often, abou t our proj- 
ects and our lives. And if we did, it would relieve  a lot of pressure 
on our psyches and produce an enormous amount of cr eative out- 
put with minimal effort. 
I've discovered that the biggest improvement opport unity in 
planning does not consist of techniques for the hig hly elaborate 
and complex kinds of project organizing that profes sional project 
managers sometimes use (like GANTT charts). Most of  the peo- 
ple who need those already have them, or at least h ave access to 
the training and software required to learn about t hem. The real 
need is to capture and utilize more of the creative , proactive 
thinking we do—or could do. 
211