11 
The Power of the Collection Habit 
THERE'S MUCH MORE to these simple techniques and mo dels than may 
appear at first glance. Indeed, they offer a system atic method to 
keep your mind distraction-free, ensuring a high le vel of effi- 
ciency and effectiveness in your work. That in itse lf would be suf- 
ficient reason to implement these practices. 
But there are even greater implications for the fun damental 
principles at work here. What follows in the next t hree chapters 
is an accounting of my experience, over the last tw enty years, 
of the subtler and often more profound effects that  can tran- 
spire from the implementation of these basic princi ples. The 
longer-term results can have a significant impact o n you as an 
individual, and they can positively affect larger o rganizational cul- 
tures as well. 
When people with whom you interact notice that with out 
fail you receive, process, and organize in an airti ght manner the 
exchanges and agreements they have with you, they b egin to trust 
you in a unique way. Such is the power of capturing  placeholders 
for anything that is incomplete or unprocessed in y our life. It 
noticeably enhances your mental well-being and impr oves the 
quality of your communications and relationships, b oth person- 
ally and professionally. 
225 
226 THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  I  PART THREE 
The Personal Benefit 
How did it feel to go through the collecting and do wnloading 
activity? Most people say it feels so bad, and yet feels so good. 
How can that be? 
If you're like most people who go through the full collec- 
tion process, you probably felt some form of anxiet y. Descriptive 
terms like "overwhelmed," "panic," "frustration," " fatigue," and 
"disgust" tend to come up when I ask seminar partic ipants to 
describe their emotions in going through a minor ve rsion of this 
procedure. And is there anything you think you've p rocrastinated 
on in that stack? If so, you have guilt automatical ly associated 
with it—"I could have, should have, ought to have ( before now) 
done this." 
At the same time, did you experience any sense of r elease, or 
relief, or control as you were did the drill? Most people say yes, 
indeed. How does that happen? Totally opposite emot ional states 
showing up as you're doing a single exercise, almos t at the same 
time—anxiety and relief; overwhelmed and in control . What's 
going on here? 
When you understand the source of your negative fee lings 
about all your stuff, you'll discover, as I did, th e way to get rid of 
them. And if you experienced any positive feelings from collect- 
ing your stuff, you actually began the process of e liminating the 
negativity yourself. 
The Source of the Negative Feelings 
Where do the not-so-good feelings come from? Too mu ch to do? 
No, there's always too much to do. If you felt bad simply because 
there was more to do than you could do, you'd never  get rid of that 
feeling. Having too much to do is not the source of  the negative 
feeling. It comes from a different place. 
How have you felt when someone broke an agreement w ith 
CHAPTER 11   I  THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABIT 
you? Told you they would meet you Thursday at 4:00 P.M. and never 
showed or called? How did that feel? Frustrating, I  imagine. The 
price people pay when they break agreements in the world is the dis- 
integration of trust in the relationship—a negative
consequence. 
But what are all those things in your in-basket? 
Agreements you've made with yourself. Your negative
feelings are simply the result of breaking those ag ree- 
ments—they're the symptoms of disintegrated self- 
trust. If you tell yourself to draft a strategic plan, whe n 
you don't do it, you'll feel bad. Tell yourself to get orga- 
nized, and if you fail to, welcome to guilt and fru stra- 
tion. Resolve to spend more time with your kids and
don't—voila! anxious and overwhelmed. 
How Do You Prevent Broken Agreements with Yourself? 
If the negative feelings come from broken agreement s, you have 
three options for dealing with them and eliminating  the negative 
consequences: 
• Don't make the agreement. 
• Complete the agreement. 
• Renegotiate the agreement. 
All of these can work to get rid of the unpleasant feelings. 
Don't Make the Agreement 
It probably felt pretty good to take a bunch of you r old stuff, 
decide that you weren't going to do anything with i t, and just toss 
it into the trash. One way to handle an incompletio n in your 
world is to just say no! 
You'd lighten up if you would just lower your stand ards. 
If you didn't care so much about things being up to  a certain 
227 The sense of
anxiety and guilt
doesn't come from 
having too much to 
do; it's the 
automatic result of
breaking 
agreements with 
yourself.
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES I PART THREE 
level—your parenting, your school system, your team 's morale, the 
software code—you'd have fewer things to do.* 
I doubt you're going to lower your standards. But o nce you 
really understand what it means, you'll probably ma ke fewer 
agreements. I know I did. I used to make a lot of t hem, just to win 
people's approval. When I realized the price I was paying on the 
back end for not keeping those agreements, I became  a lot more 
conscious about the ones I made. One insurance exec utive I 
worked with described the major benefit he derived from imple- 
menting this system: "Previously I would just tell everyone, 'Sure, 
I'll do it,' because I didn't know how much I reall y had to do. Now 
that I've got the inventory clear and complete, jus t to maintain my 
integrity I have had to say, 'No, I can't do that, I'm sorry.' The 
amazing thing is that instead of being upset with m y 
refusal, everyone was impressed by my discipline!" 
Another client, an entrepreneur in the personal 
coaching business, recently told me that making an 
inventory of his work had eliminated a huge amount 
of worry and stress from his life. The discipline o f 
putting everything he had his attention on into his
in-basket caused him to reconsider what he really 
wanted to do anything about. If he wasn't willing to toss a note 
about it into "in," he just let it go! 
I consider that very mature thinking. One of the be st things 
about this whole method is that when you really tak e the respon- 
sibility to capture and track what's on your mind, you'll think 
twice about making commitments internally that you don't really 
need or want to make. Not being aware of all you ha ve to do is 
228 *It has been a popular concept in the self-help wor ld that focusing on your val- 
ues will simplify your life. I contend the opposite : the overwhelming amount of 
things that people have to do comes from their values. Values are critical ele- 
ments for meaning and direction. But don't kid your self—the more you focus 
on them, the more things you're likely to feel resp onsible for taking on. Your 
values may make it easier for you to make decisions , but don't think they'll 
make things any simpler. Maintaining an 
objective inventory 
of your work makes 
it much easier to 
say no with 
integrity. 
CHAPTER 11  I THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABIT 
much like having a credit card for which you don't know the bal- 
ance or the limit—it's a lot easier to be irrespons ible. 
Complete the Agreement 
Of course, another way to get rid of the negative f eelings about 
your stuff is to just finish it and be able to mark  it off as done. You 
actually love to do things, as long as you get the feel- 
ing that you've completed something. If you've begu n 
to complete less-than-two-minute actions as they 
surface in your life, I'm sure you can attest to th e psy- 
chological benefit. Most of my clients feel fantast ic 
after just a couple of hours of processing their pi les, 
just because of how many things they accomplish 
using the two-minute rule. 
One of your better weekends may be spent just finis hing up a 
lot of little errands and tasks that have accumulat ed around your 
house and in your personal life. Invariably when yo u capture all 
the open loops, little and big, and see them on a l ist in front of 
you, some part of you will be inspired (or creative ly disgusted or 
intimidated enough) to go knock them off the list. 
We all seem to be starved for a win. It's great to satisfy 
that by giving yourself doable tasks you can start and finish 
easily. 
Have you ever completed something that wasn't initi ally on a 
list, so you wrote it down and checked it off? Then  you know 
what I mean. 
There's another issue here, however. How 
would you feel if your list and your stack were 
totally—and successfully—completed? You'd proba- 
bly be bouncing off the ceiling, full of creative e nergy. 
Of course, within three days, guess what you'd have ? 
Right—another list, and probably an even bigger 
one! You'd feel so good about finishing all your st uff you'd likely 
take on bigger, more ambitious things to do. 
Not only that, but if you have a boss, what do you think he or 
229 Out of the strain of 
the doing, into the 
peace of the done. 
—-Julia Louis 
Woodruff 
It's a lot easier 
to complete 
agreements when 
you know what 
they are. 
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  I  PART THREE 
she is going to do, after noticing the high levels of competency 
and productivity you're demonstrating? Right again— give you 
more things to do! It's the catch-22 of professiona l development: 
the better you get, the better you'd better get. 
So, since you're not going to significantly lower y our stan- 
dards, or stop creating more things to do, you'd be tter get com- 
fortable with the third option, if you want to keep  from stressing 
yourself out. 
Renegotiate Your Agreement 
Suppose I'd told you I would meet you Thursday at 4 :00 P.M., 
but after I made the appointment, my world changed.  Now, given 
my new priorities, I decide I'm not going to meet you Thursday 
at four. But instead of simply not showing up, what  had I better 
do, to maintain the integrity of the relationship? Correct—call 
and change the agreement. A renegotiated agreement is not a 
broken one. 
Do you understand yet why getting all your 
stuff out of your head and in front of you makes yo u 
feel better? Because you automatically renegotiate 
your agreements with yourself when you look at 
them, think about them, and either act on them that
very moment or say, "No, not now." Here's the prob-
lem: it's impossible to renegotiate agreements with
yourself that you can't remember you made! 
The fact that you can't remember an agreement 
you made with yourself doesn't mean that you're not
holding yourself liable for it. Ask any psychologis t 
how much of a sense of past and future that part of  your psyche 
has, the part that was storing the list you dumped:  zero. It's all 
present tense in there. That means that as soon as you tell yourself 
that you should do something, if you file it only i n your short- 
term memory, there's a part of you that thinks you should be 
doing it all the time. And that means that as soon as you've given 
yourself two things to do, and filed them only in y our head, 
230 It  is the act of 
forgiveness that 
opens up the only 
possible way to 
think creatively 
about the future at 
all. 
—
Father 
CHAPTER 11   I  THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABIT 
you've created instant and automatic stress and fai lure, because 
you can't do them both at the same time. 
If you're like most people, you've probably got som e storage 
area at home—maybe a garage that you told yourself a while back 
(maybe even six years ago!) you ought to clean and organize. If so, 
there's a part of you that likely thinks you should 've been cleaning 
your garage twenty-four hours a day for the past si x years! No 
wonder people are so tired! And have you heard that  little voice 
inside your own mental committee every time you wal k by your 
garage? "Why are we walking by the garage?! Aren't we supposed 
to be cleaning it!?" Because you can't stand that w hining, nagging 
part of yourself, you never even go in the garage a nymore if you 
can help it. If you want to shut that voice up, you  have three 
options for dealing with your agreement with yourse lf: 
1 |   Lower your standards about your garage (you ma y have done 
that already). "So I have a crappy garage . .. who cares?" 
2 |   Keep the agreement—clean the garage. 
3 |   At least put "Clean garage" on a "Someday/Maybe " list. 
Then, when you review that list weekly and you see that 
item, you can tell yourself, "Not this week." The n ext time 
you walk by your garage, you won't hear a thing int ernally, 
other than "Ha! Not this week." 
I'm quite sincere about this. It seems that there's  a part of our 
psyche that doesn't know the difference between an agreement 
about cleaning the garage and an agreement about bu ying a com- 
pany. In there, they're both just agreements—kept o r broken. If 
you're holding something only internally, it will b e a broken 
agreement if you're not moving on it in the moment.
The Radical Departure from Traditional Time Managem ent 
This method is significantly different from traditi onal time- 
management training. Most of those models leave you  with the 
impression that if something you tell yourself to d o isn't that 
231 
232 THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  |  PART THREE 
important, then it's not that important—to track, m anage, or deal 
with. But in my experience that's inaccurate, at le ast in terms of 
how a less-than-conscious part of us operates. It is how our con- 
scious mind operates, however, so every agreement m ust be made 
conscious. That means it must be captured, objectif ied, and 
reviewed regularly in full conscious awareness so t hat you can put 
it where it belongs in your self-management arena. If that doesn't 
happen, it will actually take up a lot more psychic  energy than it 
deserves. 
In my experience, anything that is held only in "ps ychic 
RAM" will take up either more or less attention tha n it deserves. 
The reason to collect everything is not that everyt hing is equally 
important, it's that it's not. Incompletions, uncollected, take on a 
dull sameness in the sense of the pressure they cre ate and the 
attention they tie up. 
How Much Collection Is Required? 
You'll feel better collecting anything that you haven't collected yet. 
When you say to yourself, "Oh, that's right, I need  to get butter 
next time I'm at the store," and you write it on yo ur grocery list, 
you'll feel better. When you remember, "I've got to  call my banker 
about the trust fund," and you write that down some place where 
you know you'll see it when you're at a phone, you' ll feel better. 
But there will be a light-year's difference when yo u know you 
have it all. 
When will you know how much you have left in your h ead to 
collect? Only when there's nothing left. If some pa rt of you is even 
vaguely aware that you don't have it all, you can't  really know what 
percentage you have collected. How will you know wh en there's 
nothing left? When nothing else shows up as a remin der in your 
mind. 
This doesn't mean that your mind will be empty. If you're 
conscious, your mind will always be focusing on som ething. But if 
it's focusing on only one thing at a time, without distraction, 
you'll be in your "zone." 
CHAPTER 11   I  THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABIT 
I suggest that you use your mind to think about things, rather 
than think of them. You want to be adding value as you think 
about projects and people, not simply reminding you rself they 
exist. To fully realize that more productive place,  you will need to 
capture it all. It takes focus and a change of habi t to train yourself 
to recognize and download even the smallest agreeme nts with 
yourself as they're created in your mind. Doing the  collection 
process as fully as you can, and then incorporating  the behavior of 
capturing all the new things as they emerge, will b e empowering 
and productive. 
When Relationships and Organizations 
Have the Collection Habit 
What happens when everyone involved on a team—in a mar- 
riage, in a department, on a staff, in a family, in  a company—can 
be trusted not to let anything slip through the cra cks? Frankly, 
once you've achieved that, you'll hardly think abou t whether peo- 
ple are dropping the ball anymore-—there will be mu ch bigger 
things to occupy your attention. 
But if communication gaps are still an issue, there 's likely 
some layer of frustration and a general nervousness  in the culture. 
Most people feel that without constant baby-sitting  and hand- 
holding, things could disappear in the system and t hen blow up at 
any time. They don't realize that they're feeling t his because 
they've been in this situation so consistently that  they relate to 
it as if it were a permanent law, like gravity. It doesn't have to be 
that way. 
I have noticed this for years. Good people who have n't incor- 
porated these behaviors come into my environment, a nd they 
stick out like a sore thumb. I've lived with the st andards of clear 
psychic RAM and hard, clean edges on in-baskets for  more than 
two decades now. When a note sits idle in someone's  in-basket 
unprocessed, or when he or she nods "yes, I will" i n a conversation 
233 
THE POWER OF THE KEY PRINCIPLES  I  PART THREE 
but doesn't write anything down, my "uh-oh" bell ri ngs. This is 
unacceptable behavior in my world. There are much b igger fish to 
fry than worrying about leaks in the system. 
I need to trust that any request or relevant infor-
mation I put on a voice-mail, in an e-mail, in a co n- 
versation, or in a written note will get into the o ther 
person's system and that it will be processed and 
organized, soon, and available for his or her revie w as 
an option for action. If the recipient is managing 
voice-mails but not e-mail and paper, I have now be en hamstrung 
to use only his or her trusted medium. That should be unaccept- 
able behavior in any organization that cares about whether things 
happen with the least amount of effort. 
When change is required, there must be trust that t he initia- 
tives for that change will be dealt with appropriat ely. Any intact 
system will ultimately be only as good as its weake st link, and 
often that Achilles' heel is a key person's dulled responsiveness to 
communications in the system. 
I especially notice this when I walk around organiz ations 
where in-baskets are either nonexistent, or overflo wing and obvi- 
ously long unprocessed. These cultures usually suff er from serious 
"interruptitis" because they can't trust putting co mmunications 
into the system. 
Where cultures do have solid systems, down through the 
level of paper, the clarity is palpable. It's hardl y even a conscious 
concern, and everyone's attention is more focused. The same is 
true in families that have instituted in-baskets—fo r the parents, 
the children, the nanny, the housekeeper, or anyone  else with 
whom family members frequently interact. People oft en grimace 
when I tell them that my wife, Kathryn, and I put t hings in each 
other's in-baskets, even when we're sitting within a few feet of 
each other; to them it seems "cold and mechanical."  Aside from 
being an act of politeness intended to avoid interr upting the 
other's work in progress, the practice actually fos ters more warmth 
and freedom between us, because mechanical things a re being 
234 Bailing water in a 
leaky boat diverts 
energy from rowing 
the boat. 
CHAPTER 11 | THE POWER OF THE COLLECTION HABIT 
handled in the system instead of tying up our atten tion in the 
relationship. 
Unfortunately, you can't legislate personal systems . Everyone 
must have his or her own way to deal with what he o r 
she has to deal with. You can, however, hold people
accountable for outcomes, and for tracking and man-
aging everything that comes their way. And you can 
give them the information in this book. Then, at 
least, they'll have no excuse for letting something  fall 
through the cracks. 
This doesn't mean that everyone has to do 
everything. I hope I have described a way to relate  to 
our relatively new knowledge-based world that gives
room for everyone to have a lot more to do than he or 
she can do. The critical issue will be to facilitate a 
constant renegotiation process with all involved, s o 
they feel OK about what they're not doing. That's 
real knowledge work, at a more sophisticated level.  But there's lit- 
tle hope of getting there without having bulletproo f collection 
systems in play. Remember, you can't renegotiate an  agreement 
with yourself that you can't remember you made. And  you cer- 
tainly can't renegotiate agreements with others tha t you've lost 
track of. 
When groups of people collectively adopt the 100 pe rcent 
collection standard, they have a tight ship to sail . It doesn't mean 
they're sailing in the right direction, or even tha t they're on the 
right ship; it just means that the one they're on, in the direction 
it's going, is doing that with the most efficient e nergy it can. 
235 Organizations must
create a culture in 
which it is 
acceptable that
everyone has more 
to do than he or she 
can do, and in 
which it is sage to 
renegotiate 
agreements about
what everyone is 
not doing.