Organizing: Setting Up the 
Right Buckets 
HAVING A TOTAL and seamless system of organization in place gives 
you tremendous power because it allows your mind to  let go of 
lower-level thinking and graduate to intuitive focu s- 
ing, undistracted by matters that haven't been deal t 
with appropriately. But your physical organization 
system must be better than your mental one in order
for that to happen. 
In this chapter I'll lead you through the organizin g 
steps and tools that will be required as you proces s your in-basket. As 
you initially process "in," you'll create lists and  groupings of things 
you want to organize and you'll invariably think of  additional 
items to include. In other words, your organization  system is not 
' ' something that you'll necessarily create all at  once, in 
a vacuum. It will evolve as you process your stuff and 
test out whether you have put everything in the bes t 
place for you. 
The  outer  ring  of the Workflow Diagram 
(opposite) shows the main groupings into which 
things will go as you decide what they are and what  needs to be 
done about them. 
138 
Airtight organization 
is required for your 
focus to remain on 
the broader horizon. 
I got it all together, 
but I forgot where 
I put it. 
—
CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
WORKFLOW DIAGRAM—ORGANIZING 
139 

PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
The Basic Categories 
There are seven primary types of things that you'll want to keep 
 track of and manage from an organizational perspec tive: 
 • A "Projects" list 
 • Project support material 
 • Calendared actions and information 
 • "Next Actions" lists 
• A "Waiting For" list 
• Reference material 
• A "Someday/Maybe" list 
The Importance of Hard Edges 
It's critical that all of these categories be kept pristinely distinct 
from one another. They each represent a discrete ty pe of agree- 
ment we make with ourselves, and if they lose their  edges and 
begin to blend, much of the value of organizing wil l be lost. 
If you put reference materials in the same pile as 
things you still want to read, for example, you'll go 
numb to the stack. If you put items on your "Next 
Actions" lists that really need to go on the calend ar, 
because they have to occur on specific days, then y ou 
won't trust your calendar and you'll continually ha ve to 
reassess your action lists. If you have a project t hat you're 
not going to be doing anything about for some time,  it must go onto 
your "Someday/Maybe" list so you can relate to the "Projects" list 
with the rigorous action-generating focus it needs.  And if something 
you're "Waiting For" is included on one of your act ion lists, you'll 
continually get bogged down by nonproductive rethin king. 
All You Really Need Is Lists and Folders 
Once you know what you need to keep track of (covered in the 
previous chapter, on Processing), all you really need is lists and 
140 The categories must 
be kept visually, 
physically, and 
psychologically 
separate. 
CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
folders for reference and support materials. Your l ists 
(which, as I've indicated, could also be items in f old- 
ers) will keep track of projects and someday/maybes , 
as well as the actions you'll need to take on your 
active open loops. Folders (digital or paper-based)
will be required to hold your reference material an d 
the support information for active projects. 
Lots of people have been making lists for years 
but have never found the procedure to be particular ly 
effective. There's rampant skepticism about systems
as simple as the one I'm recommending. But most 
list-makers haven't put the appropriate things on 
their lists, or have left them incomplete, which ha s kept the lists 
themselves from being very functional. Once you kno w what goes 
on the lists, however, things get much easier; then yo u just need a 
way to manage them. 
As I've said, you shouldn't bother to create some e xternal 
structuring of the priorities on your lists that yo u'll then have to 
rearrange or rewrite as things change. Attempting t o impose such 
scaffolding has been a big source of frustration in  many people's 
organizing. You'll be prioritizing more intuitively  as you see the 
whole list, against quite a number of shifting vari ables. The list is 
just a way for you to keep track of the total inven tory of active 
things to which you have made a commitment, and to have that 
inventory available for review. 
When I refer to a "list," keep in mind that I mean nothing 
more than a grouping of items with some similar cha racteristic. A 
list could look like one of three things: (1) a fil e folder with sepa- 
rate paper notes for the items within the category;  (2) an actual 
list on a titled piece of paper (often within a loo se-leaf organizer 
or planner); or (3) an inventory in a software prog ram or on a 
digital assistant, such as Microsoft Outlook task c ategories or a 
category on a handheld PDA. 
141 / would not give a 
fig for the 
simplicity on this 
side of complexity, 
but I would give 
my life for the 
simplicity on the 
other side of 
complexity. 
—Oliver Wendell 
Holmes 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWO 
Organizing Action Reminders 
If you've emptied your in-basket, you'll undoubtedl y have created 
a stack of "Pending" reminders for yourself, repres enting longer- 
than-two-minute actions that cannot be delegated to  someone 
else. You'll probably have anywhere from twenty to sixty or sev- 
enty or more such items. You'll also have accumulat ed reminders 
of things that you've handed off to other people, a nd perhaps 
some things that need be placed in your calendar or  a "Someday/ 
Maybe" kind of holder. 
You'll want to sort all of this into groupings that  make sense 
to you so you can review them as options for work t o do when you 
have time. You'll also want to decide on the most a ppropriate way 
physically to organize those groups, whether as ite ms in folders or 
on lists, either paper-based or digital. 
The Actions That Go on Your Calendar 
For the purposes of organization, as I've said, the re are two basic 
kinds of actions: those that must be done on a cert ain day and/or 
at a particular time, and those that just need to b e done as soon as 
you can get to them, around your other calendared i tems. Calen- 
dared action items can be either time-specific (e.g ., "4:00—5:00 
meet with Jim") or day-specific ("Call Rachel Tuesd ay to see if she 
got the proposal"). 
As you were processing your in-basket, you probably  came 
across things that you put right into your calendar  as they showed 
up. You may have realized that the next action on 
getting a medical checkup, for example, was to call
and make the appointment, and so (since the action 
required two minutes or less) you actually did it w hen 
it occurred to you. Writing the appointment into 
your calendar as you made it would then have been 
common sense. 
What many people want to do, however, based 
142 The calendar should 
show only the "hard 
landscape" around 
which you do the 
rest of your actions. 
CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
on old habits of writing daily to-do lists, is put actions on the calen- 
dar that they think they'd really like to get done next Monday, say, 
but that then actually might not, and that might th en have to be 
taken over to following days. Resist this impulse. You need to trust 
your calendar as sacred territory, reflecting the e xact hard edges of 
your day's commitments, which should be noticeable at a glance 
while you're on the run. That'll be much easier if the only things in 
there are those that you absolutely have to get done on that day. 
When the calendar is relegated to its proper role i n organizing, the 
majority of the actions that you need to do are lef t in the category of 
"as soon as possible, against all the other things I have to do." 
Organizing As-Soon-As-Possible Actions by Context 
Over many years I have discovered that the best way  to be 
reminded of an "as soon as I can" action is by the particular context 
required for that action—that is, either the tool o r the location or 
the person needed to complete it. For instance, if the action requires 
a computer, it should go on an "At Computer" list. If your action 
demands that you be out in your car driving around (such as stop- 
ping by the bank or going to the hardware store), t he "Errands" list 
would be the appropriate place to track it. If the next step is to talk 
about something face-to-face with your partner Emil y, putting it 
into an "Emily" folder or list makes the most sense . 
How discrete these categories will need to be will depend on 
(1) how many actions you actually have to track; an d (2) how 
often you change the contexts within which to do th em. 
If you are that rare person who has only twenty-fiv e next 
actions, a single "Next Actions" list might suffice . It could include 
items as diverse as "Buy nails" and "Talk to boss a bout staff 
changes" and "Draft ideas about off-site meeting." If, however, 
you have fifty or a hundred next actions pending, k eeping all of 
those on one big list would make it too difficult t o see what you 
needed to see; each time you got any window of time  to do some- 
thing, you'd have to do unproductive resorting. If you happened to 
be on a short break at a conference, during which y ou might be 
143 
144 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWO 
able to make some calls, you'd have to identify the  items that were 
calls among a big batch of unrelated items. When yo u went out to 
do odds and ends, you'd probably want to pick out y our errands 
and make another list. 
Another productivity factor that this kind of organ ization 
supports is leveraging your energy when you're in a  certain mode. 
When you're in "phone mode," it helps to make a lot  of phone 
calls—just crank down your "Calls" list. When your computer is up 
and running and you're cruising along digitally, it 's useful to get as 
much done on-line as you can without having to shif t into another 
kind of activity. It takes more energy than most pe ople realize to 
unhook out of one set of behaviors and get into ano ther kind of 
rhythm and tool set. And obviously, when a key pers on is sitting in 
front of you in your office, you'd be wise to have all the things you 
need to talk about with him or her immediately at h and. 
The Most Common Categories of Action Reminders 
You'll probably find that at least a few of the fol lowing common 
list headings for next actions will make sense for you: 
• "Calls" 
• "At Computer" 
•"Errand's" 
• "Office Actions" or "At Office" (miscellaneous) 
• "At Home" 
• "Agendas" (for people and meetings) 
• "Read/Review" 
"Calls" This is the list of all the phone calls you need to  make; 
you can work off it as long as you have a phone ava ilable. The 
more mobile you are (especially if you have a cell phone), the 
more useful you'll find it to have one single list of all your calls: 
those strange little windows of time that you wind up with when 
you're off-site or traveling—on a break or waiting for a plane, 
maybe—offer a perfect opportunity to work down your  list. Hav- 
CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
ing a discrete "Calls" list makes it much easier to  focus and intu- 
itively pick the best call to make in the moment. 
I -suggest that you take the time to write the phon e number 
itself alongside each item. There are many situatio ns in which you 
would probably make the call if the number was alre ady there in 
front of you but not if you had to look it up. 
"At Computer" If you work with a computer—particularly if you 
move around with a laptop or have a PC at work and another one 
at home—it can be helpful to group all those action s that you 
need to do when it's on and running. This will allo w you to see all 
your options for computer work to do, reminding you  of all the 
e-mails you need to send, the documents you need to  draft or edit, 
and so on. 
Because I fly a lot, I even maintain an "On- 
line" action list, separate from my "At Computer" 
one. When I'm on a plane, I can't easily connect to
the Web or to my server, as many actions require. S o 
instead of having to rethink what I can and can't d o 
whenever I look at my "At Computer" list, I can tru st 
that none of my "At Computer" actions require that I 
be connected, which frees my mind to make choices 
based on other criteria. 
If you have a computer only at work, you may 
not need a separate "At Computer" list; "Office Act ions" may 
cover those actions because the office is the only place you can do 
them anyway. (Similarly, if you have a computer onl y at home, 
and it's not a laptop, you may be able to put compu ter-specific 
actions on your "At Home" list.) 
"Errands" It makes a lot of sense to group together in one pl ace 
reminders of all the things you need to do when you 're "out and 
about." When you know you need to get in your car a nd go some- 
where, it's great to be able to look at the list wh ile you're on the 
road. Actions like "Get stock certificates from saf ety-deposit box," 
145 Think carefully 
about where and 
howyou can and 
can't do which 
actions, and 
organize your lists 
accordingly.
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWO 
"Pick up pictures at framers," and "Buy petunias at  nursery" would 
all go here. 
This list could, of course, be nothing more elabora te than a 
Post-it that you keep in your planner somewhere, or  a screen in an 
"Errands" category of the "To Do" section on your P alm orga- 
nizer. 
It's often helpful to track sublists within individ ual 
"Errands" items. For instance, as soon as you reali ze you need 
something from the hardware store, you might want t o make 
"Hardware Store" the list item and then append a su blist of all the 
things you want to pick up there, as you think of t hem. On the 
low-tech end, you could create a "Hardware Store" P ost-it; on 
the high-tech side, if you were using a digital lis t, you 
could attach a "note" to "Hardware Store" on your l ist 
and input the details there. 
Because I travel in major metropolitan areas so 
much, I keep two "Errands" lists—"Errands—Ojai" 
(where I live) and "Errands—Anywhere," for all 
those other things I can pick up even when I'm on 
the road. "T-connectors for irrigation" would go on
"Errands—
Ojai," but "Get dress socks" would go on "Errands—A nywhere." 
"Office Actions'/"At Office" If you work in an office, there will be 
certain things that you can do only there, and a li st of those will 
be a useful thing to have in front of you then—thou gh obviously, 
if 
you have a phone and a computer in your office, and  you have 
"Calls" and "At Computer" as separate lists, they'll be in play as 
well. I'd use an "Office Actions" or "At Office" li st for anything that 
required an Internet connection available only, or even most con- 
veniently, in the office—for example, a reminder to  download a 
large software program from the Web would go on thi s list for me. 
"At Home" Many actions can be done only at home, and it makes
sense to keep a list specific to that context. I'm sure you've got 
numerous personal and around-the-house projects, an d often the 
146 We must strive to 
reach that 
simplicity that lies 
beyond 
sophistication. 
—-John Gardner 
CHAPTER 7  I  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
next thing to do on them is just to do them. "Hang new print," 
"Organize CDs," and "Switch closets to winter cloth es" would be 
typical items for this grouping. 
If you have an office at home, as I do, anything th at can be 
done only there goes on the "At Home" list. (If you  work only at 
home and don't go to another office, you won't need  an "Office 
Actions" list at all—the "At Home" list will suffic e.) 
"Agendas"   Invariably you'll find that many of your next actio ns 
need to either occur in a real-time interaction wit h someone or be 
brought up in a committee, team, or staff meeting. 
You have to talk to your partner about an idea for 
next year; you want to check with your spouse about
his schedule for the spring; you need to delegate a
task to your secretary that's too complicated to 
explain  in  an  e-mail.  And  you  must  make  an 
announcement at the Monday staff meeting about 
the change in expense-report policies. 
These next actions should be put on separate 
"Agenda" lists for each of those people and for tha t meeting (assum- 
ing that you attend it regularly). Professionals wh o keep a file folder 
to hold all the things they need to go over with th eir boss already 
use a version of this method. If you're conscientio us about deter- 
mining all your next actions, though, you may find that you'll 
need somewhere between three and fifteen of these k inds of lists. I 
recommend that separate files or lists be kept for bosses, partners, 
assistants, spouses, and children. You should also keep the same kind 
of list for your attorney, financial adviser, accou ntant, and/or com- 
puter consultant, as well as for anyone else with w hom you might 
have more than one thing to go over the next time y ou talk on the 
phone. 
If you participate in standing meetings—staff meeti ngs, 
project meetings, board meetings, committee meeting s, what- 
ever—they, too, deserve their own files, in which y ou can collect 
things that will need to be addressed on those occa sions. 
147 Standing meetings 
and people you deal
with on an ongoing 
basis may need 
their own "Agenda" 
lists.
148 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
Often you'll want to keep a running list of things to go over 
with someone you'll be interacting with only for a limited period 
of time. For instance, if you have a contractor doi ng a significant 
piece of work on your house or property, you can cr eate a list for 
him for the duration of the project. As you're walk ing around the 
site after he's left for the day, you may notice se veral things you 
need to talk with him about, and you'll want that l ist to be easy to 
capture and to access as needed. 
Given the usefulness of this type of list, your sys tem should 
allow you to add "Agendas" ad hoc, as needed, quick ly and simply. 
For example, inserting a page for a person or a mee ting within an 
"Agenda" section in a loose-leaf notebook planner t akes only seconds, 
as does adding a dedicated "Memo" in a PDA's "Agend a" category. 
"Read/Review" You will no doubt have discovered in your in- 
basket a number of things for which your next actio n is to read. I
hope you will have held to the two-minute rule and dispatched a 
number of those quick-skim items already—tossing, f iling, or 
routing them forward as appropriate. 
To-read items that you know will demand more than t wo 
minutes of your time are usually best managed in a separate physi- 
cal stack-basket labeled "Read/Review." This is sti ll a "list" by my 
definition, but one that's more efficiently dealt w ith by group- 
ing the documents and magazines themselves in a tra y and/or 
portable folder. 
For many people, the "Read/Review" stack can get qu ite 
large. That's why it's critical that the pile be re served only for 
those longer-than-two-minute things that you actual ly want to 
read when you have time. That can be daunting enough in itself, 
but things get seriously out of control and psychologically numb- 
ing when the edges of this category are not clearly  defined. A 
pristine delineation will at least make you conscio us of the inven- 
tory, and if you're like most people, having some t ype of self- 
regulating mechanism will help you become more awar e of what 
you want to keep and what you should just get rid o f. 
CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
It's practical to have that stack of reading materi al at hand 
and easy to grab on the run when you're on your way  to a meeting 
that may be late starting, a seminar that may have a 
window of time when nothing is going on, or a den- 
tist appointment that may keep you waiting to get 
your teeth cleaned. Those are all great opportuniti es 
to crank through that kind of reading. People who 
don't have their "Read/Review" material organized 
can waste a lot of time, since life is full of weir d little 
windows when it could be processed. 
Organizing "Waiting For" 
Like reminders of the actions you need to do, reminders of all 
the things that you're waiting to get back from or get done by 
others have to be sorted and grouped. You won't nec essarily be 
tracking discrete action steps here, but more often  final deliver- 
ables or projects that others are responsible for, such as the tickets 
you've ordered from the theater, the scanner that's  coming for 
the office, the OK on the proposal from your client , and so 
on. When the next action on something is up to some one else, 
you don't need an action reminder, just a trigger about what 
you're waiting for from whom. Your role is to revie w that list as 
often as you need to and assess whether you ought t o be taking 
an action such as checking the status or lighting a  fire under the 
project. 
You'll probably find it works best to keep this "Wa iting For" 
list close at hand, in the same system as your own "Next Actions" 
reminder lists. The responsibility for the next ste p may bounce 
back and forth many times before a project is finis hed. For exam- 
ple, you may need to make a call to a vendor to req uest a proposal 
for a piece of work (on your "Calls" list.) Having made the call, 
you then wait for the vendor to get back to you wit h the proposal 
(the proposal goes to your "Waiting For" list). Whe n the propo- 
sal comes in, you have to review it (it lands in yo ur "Read/Review" 
stack-basket). Once you've gone over it, you send i t to your boss 
149 Those who make 
the worst use of 
their time are the 
first to complain of 
its shortness. 
—-Jean 
de 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWO 
for her approval (now it's back on your "Waiting Fo r" list). And 
so on.* 
You'll get a great feeling when you know that your "Waiting 
For" list is the complete inventory of everything y ou care about 
that other people are supposed to be doing. 
Using the Original Item as Its Own Action Reminder 
The most efficient way to track your action reminde rs is to add 
them to lists or folders as they occur to you. The originating trig- 
ger won't be needed after you have processed it. Yo u 
might take notes in the meeting with your boss, but
you can toss those after you've pulled out any proj ects 
and actions associated with them. While some peo- 
ple try to archive voice-mails that they still need
to "do something about," that's not the most effec-
tive way to manage the reminders embedded in them. 
There are some exceptions to this rule, however. Ce rtain 
kinds of input will most efficiently serve as their  own reminders of 
required actions, rather than your having to write something 
about them on a list. This is particularly true for  some paper- 
based materials and some e-mails. 
Managing Paper-Based Workflow 
Some things are their own best reminders of work to  be done. The 
category of "Read/Review" articles, publications, a nd documents 
is the most common example. It would obviously be o verkill to 
write "Review Fortune magazine" on some action list when you 
could just as easily toss the magazine itself into your "Read/ 
Review" basket to act as the trigger. 
150 *Digital list managers (like the Palm's) or low-tec h papers in separate folders 
have an advantage, here over lists on paper because  they let you easily move an 
item from one category to another as the action cha nges, without your having 
to rewrite anything. Keep actionable 
e-mails and paper 
separated from all
the rest. 
CHAPTER 7  I  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
Another example: people who find it easier to deal with bills 
by paying them all at one time and in one location will want to 
keep their bills in a folder or stack-basket labele d "Bills to Pay" 
(or, more generically, "Financial to Process"). Sim ilarly, receipts 
for expense reporting should be either dealt with a t the time 
they're generated or kept in their own "Receipts to  Process" enve- 
lope or folder.* 
The specific nature of your work, your input, and y our work- 
station may make it more efficient to organize othe r categories 
using only the original paper itself. A customer-se rvice profes- 
sional, for instance, may deal with numerous reques ts that show 
up in a standard written form, and in that case mai ntaining a bas- 
ket or file containing only those actionable items is the best way to 
manage them. 
Whether it makes more sense to write reminders on a  list or 
to use the originating documents in a basket or fol der will depend 
to a great extent on logistics. Could you use those  reminders 
somewhere other than at your desk? If so, the porta bility of the 
material should be considered. If you couldn't poss ibly do that 
work anywhere but at your desk, then managing remin ders of it 
solely at your workstation is the better choice. 
Whichever option you select, the reminders should b e in 
visibly discrete categories based upon the next act ion required. If 
the next action on a service order is to make a cal l, it should be in 
a "Calls" group; if the action step is to review in formation and 
input it into the computer, it should be labeled "A t Computer." 
Most undermining of the effectiveness of many workf low systems 
I see is the fact that all the documents of one typ e (e.g., service 
requests) are kept in a single tray, even though di fferent kinds of 
actions may be required on each one. One request ne eds a phone 
*This approach can be dangerous, however, if you do n't put those "Bills to Pay" 
or "Receipts to Process" in front of your face as c onsistently as you should. Just 
having them "organized" isn't sufficient to get the m off your mind—you've also 
got to review them appropriately. 
151 
152 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
call, another needs data reviewed, and still anothe r is waiting for 
someone to get back with some information—but they' re all 
sorted together. This arrangement can cause a perso n's mind to 
go numb to the stack because of all the decisions t hat are still 
pending about the next-action level of doing. 
My personal system is highly portable, with almost every- 
thing kept on lists, but I still maintain two categ ories of paper- 
based reminders. I travel with a "Read/Review" plas tic file folder 
and another one labeled "Data Entry." In the latter  I put anything 
for which the next action is simply to input data i nto my com- 
puter (business cards that need to get into my tele phone/address 
list, quotes for my "Quotes" database, articles abo ut restaurants I 
want to put on my "Travel—Cities" sublists, etc.). 
Managing E-mail-Based Workflow 
Like some paper-based materials, e-mails that need action are 
sometimes best as their own reminders—in this case within the 
tracked e-mail system itself. This is especially li kely to be true if 
you get a lot of e-mail and spend a lot of your wor k time with your 
e-mail software booted up. E-mails that you need to  act on may 
then be stored within the system instead of having their embed- 
ded actions written out on a list. 
Many of my clients have found it helpful to set up two or 
three unique folders on their e-mail navigator bars . True, most 
folders in e-mail should be used for reference or a rchived materi- 
als, but it's also possible to set up a workable sy stem that will keep 
your actionable messages discretely organized, outs ide of the "in" 
area itself (which is where most people keep them).
I recommend that you create one folder for any long er-than- 
two-minute e-mails that you need to act on (again, you should be 
able to dispatch many messages right off the bat by  following the 
two-minute rule). The folder name should begin with  a prefix let- 
ter or symbol so that (1) it looks different from y our reference 
folders and (2) it sits at the top of your folders in the navigator bar. 
Use something like the "@" sign in Microsoft or the  dash ("-") in 
CHAPTER 7 |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
Lotus, which sort into their systems at the top. Yo ur resulting 
"FACTION" folder will hold those e-mails that you n eed to do 
something about. 
Next you can create a folder titled "@WAITING FOR,"
which will show up in the same place as the "@ACTIO N" folder. 
Then, as you receive e-mails that indicate that som eone is going 
to do something that you care about tracking, you c an drag them 
over into the "@WAITING FOR" file. It can also hold  reminders 
for anything that you delegate via e-mail: when you  forward 
something, or use e-mail to make a request or deleg ate an action, 
just save a copy into the "@WAITING FOR" file.* 
Some applications (such as Lotus Notes) allow you t o file a 
copy of an e-mail into one of your folders as you s end it (with a 
"Send and File" button). Others (e.g., Outlook) wil l simultane- 
ously save only into your universal "Sent Mail" fol der. In the latter 
case, what seems to work best for many is to copy ( "cc" or "bcc") 
themselves when they delegate via e-mail, and then to pull that 
copy into their "@WAITING FOR" folder. (It's relati vely easy to 
program Outlook to automatically send any e-mail th at you "cc" 
to yourself into a designated folder, which would r eplicate the 
process just described.) 
Getting E-mail "In" to "Empty" The method detailed above will 
enable you to actually get everything out of your e -mail in-basket, 
which will be a huge boon to your clarity about and  control of 
your day-to-day work. You'll reclaim "in" as "in," so anything 
residing there will be like a message on your answe ring 
machine—a blinking light telling you you need to pr ocess some- 
thing! Most people use their e-mail "in" for stagin g still-undecided 
actionable things and reference, a practice that ra pidly numbs 
the mind: they know they've got to reassess everyth ing every 
*Microsoft Outlook allows users to copy or move e-m ails into its "Tasks" con- 
text, which, if organized according to my recommend ed categories, could work 
equally well. 
153 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWO 
time they glance at the screen. If you never had more 
than a screenful of e-mails, this approach might 
be reasonably functional, but with the volume most 
professionals are dealing with these days, that doe sn't 
apply. 
Again, getting "in" empty doesn't mean you've 
handled everything. It means that you've DELETED wh at you 
could, FILED what you wanted to keep but don't need  to act on, 
DONE the less-than-two-minute responses, and moved into 
your reminder folders all the things you're waiting  for and all your 
actionable e-mails. Now you can open the "@ACTION" file and 
review the e-mails that you've determined you need to spend time 
on. Isn't that process easier to relate to than fum bling through 
multiple screens, fearing all the while that you ma y miss some- 
thing that'll blow up on you? 
A Caution About Dispersing Reminders of Your Action s 
There's an obvious danger in putting reminders of 
things you need to do somewhere out of sight. The 
function of an organization system is primarily to 
supply the reminders you need to see when you need 
to see them, so you can trust your choices about wh at 
you're doing (and what you're not doing). Before yo u leave the 
office for the day, the actionable e-mails that you  still have pend- 
ing must be reviewed individually, just like your " Calls" or "At 
Computer" lists. In essence, "@ACTION" is an extens ion of your 
"At Computer" list and should be handled in exactly  the same 
fashion. Your paper-based "Pending" workflow must l ikewise be 
assessed like a list if the paper materials are bei ng used as your 
only reminders. 
Distributing action triggers in a folder, on lists,  and/or in an 
e-mail system is perfectly OK, as long as you review all of the cate- 
gories to which you've entrusted your triggers equa lly, as required. You 
don't want things lurking in the recesses of your s ystems and not 
being used for their intended purpose: reminding yo u. 
154 It requires much 
less energy to 
maintain e-mail at 
a zero base than at 
a thousand base. 
"Out of sight, out of 
mind" is not really 
out of mind. 
CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
In order to hang out with friends or take a long, a imless walk 
and truly have nothing on your mind, you've got to know where 
all your actionable items are located, what they ar e, and that they 
will wait. And you need to be able to do that in a few seconds, 
not days. 
Organizing Project Reminders 
Creating and maintaining one list of all your proje cts (that is, 
again, every commitment or desired outcome that may  require 
more than one action step to complete) can be a pro found experi- 
ence! You probably have more of them than you think . If you 
haven't done so already, I recommend that initially  you make a 
"Projects" list in a very simple format, similar to  the ones you've 
used for your lists of actions: it can be a categor y in a digital orga- 
nizer, a page in a loose-leaf planner, or even a si ngle file folder 
labeled "PROJECTS," with either a master list or se parate sheets 
of paper for each one. 
The "Projects" List(s) 
The "Projects" list is not meant to hold plans or d etails about your 
projects themselves, nor should you try to keep it arranged by pri- 
ority or size or urgency—it's just a comprehensive index of your 
open loops. You actually won't be working off of th e "Projects" list 
during your day-to-day activities; for the most par t, your action 
lists and any ad hoc tasks that come up will consti tute your tactical 
in-the-moment focus. Remember, you can't do a proj- 
ect, you can only do the action steps it requires. 
The real value of the "Projects" list lies in the 
complete review it can provide (at least once a wee k), 
allowing you to ensure that you have action steps 
defined for all of your projects, and that nothing is 
slipping through the cracks. A quick glance at this
list from time to time will enhance your underlying
155 A complete and 
current "Projects" 
list is the major 
operational tool for 
moving from tree- 
hugging to forest
management.
156 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
sense of control. You'll also know that you have an  inventory 
available to you (and to others) whenever it seems advisable to 
evaluate workload(s). 
One List, or Subdivided? 
Most people find that one list is the best way to g o because 
it serves as a master inventory rather than as a da ily prioritiz- 
ing guideline. The organizing system merely provide s placeholders 
for all your open loops and options so your mind ca n more 
easily make the necessary intuitive, moment-to-mome nt strategic 
decisions. 
Frankly, it doesn't matter how many different lists  of projects 
you have, so long as you look at the contents of all of them as 
often as you need to, since for the most part you'l l do that in one 
fell swoop during your Weekly Review. 
Some Common Ways to Subsort Projects 
There are some situations in which it makes good se nse to sub- 
sort a "Projects" list. Let's look at these one by one. 
Personal/Professional Many people feel more comfortable see- 
ing their lists divided up between personal and pro fessional 
* projects. If you're among them, be advised that y our "Personal" 
list will need to be reviewed as judiciously as you r "Professional" 
one, and not just saved for weekends. Many actions on personal 
things will need to be handled on weekdays, exactly  like every- 
thing else. And often some of the greatest pressure s on profes- 
sionals stem from the personal aspects of their liv es that they are 
letting slip. 
Delegated Projects If you're a senior manager or executive, you 
probably have several projects that you are directl y responsible for 
but have handed off to people who report to you. Wh ile you 
could, of course, put them on your "Waiting For" li st, it might 
make better sense to create a "Projects—Delegated" list to 
track 
CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
them: your task will be simply to review the list r egularly enough 
to ensure that everything on it is moving along app ropriately. 
Specific Types of Projects Some professionals have as part of their 
work several different projects of the same type, which in some 
instances it maybe valuable to group together as a sublist of "Proj- 
ects." For example, I maintain a separate category called "Projects 
to Deliver," a chronological listing of all the upc oming seminars, 
coaching, and consulting assignments I've committed  to. These 
events are "projects" like the rest, in that I need  to keep noting 
whether things are moving along on and in place for  them until 
they're completed. But I find it helpful to see the m all organized 
on one list, in the order in which they are coming up on my calen- 
dar, apart from my other projects. 
If you are a real estate agent, sell consulting ser vices, or 
develop proposals for a relatively small number of prospective 
clients in any profession, you will likely find it useful to see all of 
your outstanding "sales relationships in progress" in one view. 
This could be a separate list in your planner calle d "Client 
Projects in Development," or if you already have fi le folders for 
each in-progress project, it may suffice to group t hem all in one 
file stand on your credenza. Just realize that this  approach will 
work only if it represents a complete set of all of  those situa- 
tions that require action, and only if you review t hem regularly 
along with the rest of your projects, keeping them current and 
conscious. 
What About Subprojects? 
Some of your projects will likely have major sub projects, each of 
which could in theory be seen as a whole project. I f you're moving 
into a new house, for instance, and are upgrading a nd changing 
much of the property, you may have a list of action able items like 
"Finalize landscaping," "Renovate kitchen," "Rewire  basement," 
and so on, all of which could in themselves be cons idered separate 
projects. Do you make all of this one entry on your  "Projects" 
157 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWO 
list—say, "Finish new home renovations"—or do you w rite 
up 
each of the subprojects as an individual line item?
Actually, it won't matter, as long as you review al l the compo- 
nents of the project as frequently as you need to t o stay produc- 
tive. No external tool or organizing format is goin g to be perfect 
for sorting both horizontally across and vertically  down through 
all your projects; you'll still have to be aware of  the whole in some 
cohesive way (such as via your Weekly Review). If y ou make the 
large project your one listing on your "Projects" l ist, you'll want to 
keep a list of the subprojects and/or the project p lan itself as "proj- 
ect support material" to be reviewed when you come to that major 
item. I would recommend doing it this way if big pi eces of the 
project are dependent on other pieces getting done first. In that 
scenario you might have subprojects with no next ac tions attached 
to them because they are in a sense "waiting for" o ther things to 
happen before they can move forward. For instance, you might 
not be able to start on "Renovate kitchen" until yo u finish "Rewire 
basement." However, you might be able to proceed on  "Finalize 
landscaping" independent of either of the other sub projects. You 
would therefore want a next action to be continuall y current on 
"Rewire basement" and "Finalize landscaping." 
Don't be too concerned about which way is best. If you're not 
* sure, I'd vote for putting your Big Projects on t he "Projects" list 
and holding the subpieces in your project support 
material, making sure to include them in your 
Weekly Review, If that arrangement doesn't feel 
quite right, try including the active and independent 
subprojects as separate entries on your master list . 
There's no perfect system for tracking all your 
projects and subprojects the same way. You just nee d 
to know you have projects and, if they have associated 
components, where to find the appropriate reminders
for them. 
158 How you list 
projects and 
subprojects is up to 
you; just be sure 
you know where to 
find all the moving 
parts. 
CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
Project Support Materials 
Project support materials are not project actions, and they're not 
project reminders. They're resources to support you r actions and 
thinking about your projects. 
Don't Use Support Material for Reminding Typically, people use 
stacks of papers and thickly stuffed file folders as reminders that 
(1) they've got a project, and (2) they've got to do something abou t 
it. They're essentially making support materials se rve as action 
reminders. The problem is that next actions and "Wa iting For" 
items on these projects have usually not been deter mined and are 
psychologically still embedded in the stacks and th e folders—
giving them the aura of just more "stuff" that repe ls its (un)orga- 
nizer instead of attracting him or her to action. W hen you're on 
the run, in the heat of the activities of the day, files like that are 
the last thing you'll want to pick up and peruse fo r actions. You'll 
actually go numb to the files and the piles because  they don't 
prompt you to do anything and they simply create mo re anxiety. 
If you're in this kind of situation, you must first  add the proj- 
ect itself to your "Projects" list, as a reminder t hat there's an out- 
come to be achieved. Then the action steps and "Wai ting For" 
items must be put onto their appropriate action rem inder lists. 
Finally, when it's time to actually do an action, like making a call to 
someone about the project, you can pull out all the  materials you 
think you might need to have as support during the conversation. 
To reiterate, you don't want to use support materials as your 
primary reminders of what to do—that should be rele gated to 
your action lists. If, however, the materials conta in project plans 
and overviews in addition to ad hoc archival and re ference infor- 
mation, you may want to keep them a little more vis ibly accessible 
than you do the pure reference materials in your fi ling cabinet. 
The latter place is fine for support stuff, too, so  long as you have 
the discipline to pull out the file drawer and take  a look at the 
plan every time you do your Weekly Review. If not, you're better 
159 
160 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
off storing those kinds of project support files in  a standing 
file holder or a separate "Pending" stack-basket on  your desk or 
credenza. 
To return to the previous example of moving into a new 
house, you could have a folder labeled "New House" containing 
all the plans and details and notes about the lands caping and 
the kitchen and the basement. In your Weekly Review , when 
you came to "Finish new home renovations" on your " Projects" 
list, you'd pull out the "New House" file and thumb  through all 
your notes to ensure that you weren't missing any p ossible next 
actions. Those actions would then get done, delegat ed, or 
deferred onto your action lists, and the folder wou ld be refiled 
until you needed it again for doing the actions or for your next 
Weekly Review. 
Many people who interact with prospects and clients
have attempted to use client folders and/or contact -management 
software such as Act! to "manage the account." The problem 
here is that some material is just facts or histori cal data that 
needs to be stored as background for when you might  be able to 
use it, and some of what must be tracked is the act ions required 
to move the relationships forward. The latter can b e more ef- 
fectively organized within your action-lists system . Client in- 
formation is just that, and it can be folded into a  general-reference 
file on the client or stored within a client-focuse d library. (I 
use Act! for the single great feature it offers of allowing me 
to cross-reference general company information and signifi- 
cant interactions with key people within the compan y. It's just 
a good client-centered database.) If I need to call  a client, I 
don't want that reminder embedded anywhere but on m y "Calls" 
list. 
Organizing Ad Hoc Project Thinking 
In chapter 3, I suggested that you will often have ideas that you'll 
want to keep about projects but that are not necess arily next 
actions. Those ideas fall into the broad category o f "project sup- 
CHAPTER 7  I  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
port materials," and may be anything from a notion about some- 
thing you might want to do on your next vacation to  a clarifica- 
tion of some major components in a project plan. Th ese thoughts 
could come as you're driving down the freeway liste ning to a news 
story on the radio, or reading a relevant article. What 
do you do with that kind of material? 
My recommendation here is that you consider 
where you're keeping tabs on the project or topic 
itself, how you might add information to it in that
format, and where you might store any more exten- 
sive data associated with it. Most professionals wi ll have several 
options for how to handle support materials, includ ing attaching 
notes to a list item, organizing digital informatio n in e-mail 
and/or databases, and maintaining paper-based files  and notes in 
notebooks. 
Attached Notes Most organizing software allows you to attach a 
digital "note" to a list or calendar entry. If you' re keeping a "Proj- 
ects" list within the software, you can go to the p roject you had a 
thought about, open or attach a "note" to it, and t ype in your idea. 
This is an excellent way to capture "back-of-the-en velope" project 
thinking. If your "Projects" list is paper-based, y ou can attach a 
Post-it note next to the item on your master list o r, if you're a low- 
tech type, on the item's separate sheet. In any cas e, you'll need to 
remember to look at the attachment when you review your proj- 
ect, to make use of the data. 
E-mail and Databases E-mails that might contain good informa- 
tion related to your projects can be held in a dedi cated e-mail folder 
(just follow the instructions on pages 152-53 for " @ACTION" 
and call it something like "@PROJECTS"). You may al so find it 
worthwhile, if you don't have one already, to set u p a more rigor- 
ous kind of digital database for organizing your th inking on a 
project or topic. If your company uses Lotus Notes,  for example, 
you can create a project database either for your o wn private use 
161 There is no need" 
ever to lose an idea 
about a project,
theme, or topic.
162 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  I  PART TWO 
on your PC or to be shared with others in your netw ork.* It's 
worth looking into some of the other types of free- form databases 
that are on the market, too—even just for your own use. It's great 
to be able to cut and paste from the Web or from e- mails and drop 
data under a topic somewhere or type in your own th oughts. Be 
sure, also, to explore the technology and tools tha t you already 
have—just learning how to use all the lists and att achments in 
something like the Palm organizer may provide you w ith suffi- 
cient "back-of-the-envelope" capability. 
Paper-Based Files Having a separate file folder devoted to each 
project makes a lot of sense when you're accumulati ng paper- 
based materials; it may be low-tech, but it's an el egant solution 
nonetheless. Simplicity and ease of handling make f or a good 
general-reference filing system—one that lets you f eel comfort- 
able about creating a folder for scraps of paper fr om a meeting. 
Pages in Notebooks A great advantage of paper-based loose-leaf 
notebooks is that you can dedicate a whole page or group of pages 
to an individual project. For years I maintained a midsize notebook 
with a "Projects" list in front and a "Project Supp ort" section 
toward the back, where I always had some blank page s to capture 
any random thinking or plans and details about proj ects on my list. 
Each of the methods described above can be effectiv e in organiz- 
ing project thinking. The key is that you must cons istently look 
for any action steps inherent in your project notes , and review the 
notes themselves as often as you think is necessary , given the 
nature of the project. 
You'll also want to clear out many of your notes on ce they 
*Many Lotus Notes users don't even realize they can  do this, but in fact it's one 
of the program's most powerful features. If you hav e Notes, check with your 
resident IT resource person and have him or her req uest system permission and 
show you how. 
CHAPTER 7  I  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
become inactive or unreal, to keep the whole system  from catch- 
ing the "stale" virus. I've found a lot of value in  capturing these 
types of thoughts, more for the way it consistently  helps my 
thinking process than because I end up using every idea (most I 
don't!). But I try to make sure not to let my old t houghts stay 
around too long, pretending they're useful when the y're not. 
Organizing Nonactionable Data 
Interestingly, one of the biggest problems with mos t people's per- 
sonal management systems is that they blend a few a ctionable 
things with a large amount of data and material tha t has value but 
no action attached. Having good, consistent structu res with 
which to manage the nonactionable items in our work  and lives is 
as important as managing our action and project rem inders. 
When the nonactionable items aren't properly manage d, they 
clog up the whole process. 
Unactionable items fall into two large categories: reference 
materials and reminders of things that need no acti on now but 
might at a later date. 
Reference Materials 
Much of what comes across your desk and into your l ife in general 
is reference material. There's no action required, but it's informa- 
tion that you want to keep, for a variety of reason s. Your major 
decisions will be how much to keep, how much room t o dedicate 
to it, what form it should be stored in, and where.  Much of that 
will be a personal or organizational judgment call based upon 
legal or logistical concerns or personal preference s. The only time 
you should have attention on your reference materia l is when you 
need to change your system in some way because you have too 
much or too little information, given your needs or  preferences. 
The problem most people have psychologically with a ll their 
stuff is that it's still "stuff"—that is, they have n't decided what's 
163 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWO 
actionable and what's not. Once you've made a clean  distinction 
about which is which, what's left as reference shou ld have no 
pull or incompletion associated with it—it's just y our library. 
Your only decision then is how big a library you wa nt. When 
you've fully implemented this action-management met ho- 
dology, you can be as big a packrat as your space ( physical 
and digital) will allow. As I've increased the size  of the hard 
disk in my computer, I've kept that much more e-mai l in my 
archives. The more the merrier, as far as I'm conce rned, since 
increasing the volume of pure reference material ad ds no psychic 
weight. 
The Variety of Reference Systems 
There are a number of ways to organize reference ma terial, and 
many types of tools to use. What follows is a brief  discussion of 
some of the most common. 
• General-reference filing—paper and e-mail 
• Large-category filing 
• Rolodexes and contact managers 
• Libraries and archives 
General-Reference Filing As I've said, a good filing 
system is critical for processing and organizing yo ur 
stuff. It's also a must for dealing with the someti mes 
huge volume of paper-based materials that are valu-
able for you for one reason or another. Ideally you
will already have set up a general-reference filing  sys- 
tem as you were processing "in." You need to feel 
comfortable storing even a single piece of paper th at 
you might want to refer to later, and your system 
must be informal and accessible enough that it's a snap to file it 
away in your alphabetized general-reference system,  right at hand 
where you work. If you're not set up that way yet, look back at 
chapter 4 for help on this topic. 
164 Your filing system 
should be a simple 
library of data, 
easily 
retrievable—
not your reminder 
for actions, 
projects, priorities, 
CHAPTER 7  I  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
Most people seem to wind up with 200 to 400 paper-b ased 
general-reference files and 30 to 100 e-mail refere nce folders. 
Large-Category Filing Any topic that requires more than fifty 
file folders should probably be given its own secti on or drawer, 
with its own alpha-sorted system. For instance, if you're managing 
a corporate merger and need to keep hold of a lot o f the paper- 
work, you may want to dedicate two or three whole f ile cabinets to 
all the documentation required in the due-diligence  process. If 
gardening or sailing or cooking is your passion, yo u may need at 
least a whole file drawer for those designated hobb ies. 
Bear in mind that if your "area of focus" has suppo rt material 
that could blend into other "areas of focus," you m ay run into the 
dilemma of whether to store the information in gene ral reference 
or in the specialized reference files. When you rea d a great article 
about wood fencing and want to keep it, does that g o in your 
"Garden" cabinet or in the general system with othe r information 
about home-related projects? As a general rule, it' s best to stick 
with one general-reference system except for a very  limited num- 
ber of discrete topics. 
Rolodexes and Contact Managers Much of the information that 
you need to keep is directly related to people in y our network. You 
need to track contact information of all sorts—home  and office 
phone numbers and addresses, cell-phone numbers, fa x numbers, 
e-mail addresses, and so on. In addition, if you fi nd it useful, you 
may want to maintain information about birthdays, n ames of 
friends' and colleagues' family members, hobbies, f avorite wines 
and foods, and the like. In a more rigorous profess ional vein, you 
may need or want to track hire dates, performance-r eview dates, 
goals and objectives, and other potentially relevan t data for staff 
development purposes. 
The telephone/address section of most of the organi zers sold 
in the last fifty years is probably (along with the  calendar) their 
most commonly used component. Everyone needs to kee p track 
165 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWO 
of phone numbers. It's instructive to note that thi s is purely and 
simply reference material. No action is required—th is is just 
information that you might need to access in the fu ture. 
So there's no big mystery about how to organize it,  aside 
from the logistics for your individual needs. Again , the only prob- 
lem comes up when people try to make their Rolodexe s serve as 
tools for reminding them about things they need to do. That 
doesn't work. As long as all the actions relative t o people you 
know have been identified and tracked in your actio n reminder 
lists, there's no role for telephone and address sy stems to fill other 
than being a neutral address book. 
The only issue then becomes how much information yo u 
need to keep and where and in what equipment you ne ed to keep 
it in order to have it accessible when you want it.  Nothing's per- 
fect in that regard, but as the small digital tools  become easier to 
use and connect to larger databases, you'll be able  to have more 
information at hand with the same or less effort. 
Libraries and Archives: Personalized Levels Information that 
might be useful lives at many levels. You could pro bably find out 
pretty much anything if you were willing to dig deep enough. The 
question of how much to keep, how close, and in wha t form, will 
be a changing reality, given the variables of your needs and your 
particular comfort levels with data. Relative to yo ur personal 
organization and productivity, this is not a core i ssue, 
so long as all of your projects and actions are in a 
control system that you work with regularly. Refer-
ence material in all its forms then becomes nothing
more or less than material to capture and create 
access to according to your particular proclivities  and 
requirements. 
Some degree of consistency will always make 
things easier. What kinds of things do you need wit h you all the 
time? Those must go into your ubiquitous planner or  PDA. What 
do you need specifically for meetings or off-site e vents? That 
166 If material is purely 
for reference, the 
only issue is 
whether it's worth 
the time and space 
required to keep it. 
CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
should be put into your briefcase, pack, satchel, o r purse. What 
might you need when you're working in your office? That should 
be put into your personal filing system or your net worked com- 
puter. What about rare situations relative to your job? Material 
needed for those could be archived in departmental files or off- 
site storage. What could you find anytime you might  need it, on 
the Web? You don't need to do anything with that in formation, 
unless you need it when you're away from a Web conn ection, in 
which case you should print the data out when you'r e online and 
store it in a file you can take with you. 
Do you see how that personal organization of refere nce 
material is simply a logistical issue? Distinguishi ng actionable 
things from nonactionable ones is the key success f actor in this 
arena. Once you've done that, you have total freedo m to manage 
and organize as much or as little reference materia l as you want. 
It's a highly individual decision that ought to be based on the ratio 
of the value received to the time and effort requir ed to capture and 
maintain it. 
Someday/Maybes 
The last thing to deal with in your organization sy stem is how to 
track things that you may want to reassess in the f uture. These 
could range from a special trip you might want to t ake one day, to 
books you might want to read, to projects you might  want to 
tackle in the next fiscal year, to skills and talen ts you might want 
to develop. For a full implementation of this model
you'll need some sort of "back burner" or "on hold"
component. 
There are several ways to stage things for later 
review, all of which will work to get them off your
current radar and your mind. You can put the items 
on various versions of "Someday/Maybe" lists or 
trigger them on your calendar or in a paper-based 
"tickler" system. 
167 Someday/Maybe's 
are not throwaway 
items. They may be 
some of the most
interesting and 
creative things 
you'll ever get
involved with.
168 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
"Someday/Maybe" List 
It's highly likely that if you did a complete mind- sweep when you 
were collecting things out of your psychic RAM, you  came up with 
some things you're not sure you want to commit to. "Learn Span- 
ish," "Get Marcie a horse," "Climb Mt, Washington,"  and "Build a 
guest cottage" are typical projects that fall into this category. 
If you haven't already done it, I recommend that yo u create a 
"Someday/Maybe" list in whatever organizing system you've cho- 
sen. Then give yourself permission to populate that  list with all 
the items of that type that have occurred to you so  far. You'll 
probably discover that simply having the list and s tarting to fill it 
out will cause you to come up with all kinds of cre ative ideas. 
You may also be surprised to find that some of the things you 
write on the list will actually come to pass, almos t without your 
making any conscious effort to make them happen. If  you 
acknowledge the power of the imagination to foster changes in 
perception and performance, it's easy to see how ha ving a 
"Someday/Maybe" list out in front of your conscious  mind could 
potentially add many wonderful adventures to your l ife and work. 
We're likely to seize opportunities when they arise  if we've already 
identified and captured them as a possibility. That  has certainly 
been my own experience: learning to play the flute and how to sail 
big boats both started in this category for me. In addition to 
your in-basket, there are two rich sources to tap f or your "Some- 
day/Maybe" list: your creative imagination and your  list of current 
projects. 
Make an Inventory of Your Creative Imaginings What are the 
things you really might want to do someday if you h ave the time, 
money, and inclination? Write them on your have "So meday/ 
Maybe" list. Typical categories include: 
• Things to get or build for your home 
• Hobbies to take up 
CHAPTER 7  I  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
• Skills to learn 
• Creative expressions to explore 
• Clothes and accessories to buy 
• Toys (gear!) to acquire 
• Trips to take 
• Organizations to join 
• Service projects to contribute to 
• Things to see and do 
Reassess Your Current Projects    Now's a good time to review your 
"Projects" list from a more elevated perspective (t hat is, the stand- 
point of your job and goals) and consider whether 
you might transfer some of your current commit- 
ments to "Someday/Maybe." If on reflection you 
realize that an optional project doesn't have a cha nce 
of getting your attention for the next months or 
more, move it to this list. 
Special Categories of "Someday/Maybe" 
More than likely you have some special interests th at involve lots 
of possible things to do. It can be fun to collect these on lists. For 
instance: 
• Food—recipes, menus, restaurants, wines 
• Children—things to do with them 
• Books to read 
• CDs to buy 
• Videos to buy/rent 
• Cultural events to attend 
• Gift ideas 
• Garden ideas 
• Web sites to surf 
• Weekend trips to take 
• Meeting ideas 
• Party ideas 
169 What lies in our 
power to do, lies in 
our power not 
to do. 
—
170 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
• Ideas—Misc. (meaning you don't know where else to  put 
them!) 
These kinds of lists can be a cross between referen ce and 
"Someday/Maybe"—reference because you can just coll ect and 
add to lists of good wines or restaurants or books,  to consult as 
you like; "Someday/Maybe" because you might want to  review the 
listed items on a regular basis to remind yourself to try one or 
more of them at some point. 
In any case, this is another great reason to have a n organizing 
system that makes it easy to capture things that ma y add value 
and variety and interest to your life—without clogg ing your mind 
and work space with undecided, unfinished business.
The Danger of "Hold and Review" Files and Piles 
Many people have created some sort of "Hold and Rev iew" pile or 
file (or whole drawer) that vaguely fits within the  category of 
"Someday/Maybe." They tell themselves, "When I have  time, I 
may like to get to this," and a "Hold and Review" f ile seems a con- 
venient place to put it. I personally don't recomme nd this particu- 
lar kind of subsystem, because in virtually every c ase I have come 
across, the client "held" but didn't "review," and there was numb- 
ness and resistance about the stack. The value of " someday/ 
maybe" disappears if you don't put your conscious a wareness back 
on it with some consistency. 
Also, there's a big difference between something th at's man- 
aged well, as a "Someday/Maybe" list, and something  that's just a 
catchall bucket for "stuff." Usually much of that s tuff needs to be 
tossed, some of it needs to go into "Read/Review," some needs 
to be filed as reference, some belongs on the calen dar or in a 
tickler file (see page 173) for review in a month o r perhaps at the 
beginning of the next quarter, and some actually ha s next actions 
on it. Many times, after appropriately processing s omeone's 
"Hold and Review" drawer or file, I've discovered t here was noth- 
ing left in it! 
CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
Using the Calendar for Future Options 
Your calendar can be a very handy place to park rem inders of 
things you might want  to consider doing in the future. Most of the 
people I've coached were not nearly as comfortable with their cal- 
endars as they could have been; otherwise they prob ably would 
have found many more things to put in there. 
One of the three uses of a calendar is for day-specific informa- 
tion. This category can include a number of things, but o ne of the 
most creative ways to utilize this function is to e nter things that 
you want to take off your mind and reassess at some  later date. 
Here are a few of the myriad things you should cons ider inserting: 
• Triggers for activating projects 
• Events you might want to participate in 
• Decision catalysts 
Triggers for Activating Projects If you have a project that you 
don't really need to think about now but that deser ves a flag at 
some point in the future, you can pick an appropria te date and put 
a reminder about the project in your calendar for t hat day. It 
should go in some day-specific (versus time-specifi c) calendar slot 
for the things you want to be reminded of on that d ay; then when 
the day arrives, you see the reminder and insert th e item as an 
active project on your "Projects" list. Typical can didates for this 
treatment are: 
• Special events with a certain lead time for handlin g (product 
launches, fund-raising drives, etc.) 
• Regular events that you need to prepare for, such a s budget 
reviews, annual conferences, planning events, or me etings (e.g., 
when should you add next year's "annual sales confe rence" to 
your "Projects" list?) 
• Key dates for significant people that you might wan t to do some- 
thing about (birthdays, anniversaries, holiday gift -giving, etc.) 
171 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWO 
Events You Might Want to Participate In You probably get notices 
constantly about seminars, conferences, speeches, a nd social and 
cultural events that you may want to decide about a ttending as the 
time gets closer. So figure out when that "closer" time is and put a 
trigger in your calendar on the appropriate date—fo r example: 
"Chamber of Commerce breakfast tomorrow?" 
"Tigers season tickets go on sale today" 
"PBS special on Australia tonight 8:00 P.M." 
"Church BBQ next Saturday" 
If you can think of any jogs like these that you'd like to put 
into your system, do it right now. 
Decision Catalysts    Once in a while there may be a significant 
decision that you need to make but can't (or don't want to) make 
right away. That's fine, as long as you've conclude d that the addi- 
tional information you need has to come from an internal rather 
than an external source (e.g., you need to sleep on it). 
(Obviously, external data you need in order to make  a 
decision should go on your "Next Actions" or "Wait-
ing For" lists.) But in order to move to a level of  OK- 
ness about not deciding, you'd better put out a safety 
net that you can trust to get you to focus on the i ssue 
appropriately in the future. A calendar reminder ca n 
serve that purpose.* 
Some typical decision areas in this category includ e: 
• Hire/fire 
• Merge/acquire/sell/divest 
• Change job/career 
172 *If you're using a group-accessible calendar, you m ust maintain discretion about 
these kinds of triggers. Digital calendars usually have "private" categorization 
functions you can use for entries you don't necessa rily want everyone to see. It's OK to decide not 
to decide—as long 
as you have a 
decide-not-to- 
decide system. 
CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
This is a big topic to devote so little space to, I  know, but go 
ahead and ask yourself, "Is there any major decisio n for which I 
should create a future trigger, so I can feel comfo rtable just 'hang- 
ing out' with it for now?" If there is, put some re minder in your 
calendar to revisit the issue. 
The "Tickler" File 
One elegant way to manage nonactionable items that may need 
an action in the future is the "tickler" file.* A t hree-dimensional 
version of a calendar, it allows you to hold physical reminders of 
things that you want to see or remember—not now, bu t in the 
future. It can be an extremely functional tool, all owing you to in 
effect set up your own post office and "mail" thing s to yourself for 
receipt on a designated future date. I myself have used a tickler file 
for years and can't imagine being without it. 
Essentially the tickler is a simple file-folder sys tem that 
allows you to distribute paper and other physical r eminders in 
such a way that whatever you want to see on a parti cular date in 
the future "automatically" shows up that day in you r in-basket. 
If you have a secretary or assistant, you can entru st at least a 
part of this task to him or her, assuming that he/s he has some 
working version of this or a similar system. Typica l examples 
would be: 
• "Hand me this agenda the morning of the day I have the 
meeting." 
• "Give this back to me on Monday to rethink, since i t applies to 
a meeting on Wednesday." 
• "Remind me about the Hong Kong trip two weeks ahead , and 
we'll plan the logistics." 
Then every day of the week, that day's folder is pu lled and 
reviewed. 
*Also referred to as a "suspense," "bring forward,"  or "follow-up" file. 
173 
174 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY I  PART TWO 
While you can (and probably should) utilize staff t o handle 
as much of this as is appropriate, I recommend that , if you can 
integrate it into your life-style, you maintain you r own tickler file. 
There are many useful functions it can perform, at least some of 
which you may want to avail yourself of outside the  pale of your 
assistant's responsibilities. I use my tickler file  to manage my 
travel tickets and confirmations; paper-based trave l directions, 
agendas, and maps; reminders of event notifications  that come in 
the mail; information about "might-want-to-buy" kin ds of things 
I want to reconsider in the future; and so forth. 
Bottom line: the tickler file demands only a one-se cond-per- 
day new behavior to make it work, and it has a payo ff value 
logarithmically greater than the personal investmen t. 
Setting Up a Tickler File You need forty-three folders—thirty- 
one daily files labeled "1" through "31," and twelv e more labeled 
with the names of the months of the year. The daily  files are kept 
in front, beginning with the file for tomorrow's da te (if today is 
October 5, then the first file would be "6"). The s ucceeding daily 
files represent the days of the rest of the month ( "6" through 
"31"). Behind the "31" file is the monthly file for  the next month 
("November"), and behind that are the daily files " 1" though "5." 
Following that are the rest of the monthly files (" December" 
through "October"). The next daily file is emptied into your in- 
basket every day, and then the folder is refiled at  the back of the 
dailies (at which point, instead of October 6, it r epresents Novem- 
ber 6). In the same way, when the next monthly file rea ches the 
front (on October 31 after you empty the daily file , the "Novem- 
ber" file will be the next one, with the daily file s "1" through "31" 
behind it), it's emptied into the in-basket and ref iled at the back 
of the monthlies to represent November a year from now. This is a 
"perpetual" file, meaning that at any given time it  contains files for 
the next thirty-one days and the next twelve months . 
The big advantage of using file folders for your ti ckler system is 
that they allow you to store actual documents (the form that needs 
FILE-FOLDER-STYLE SAMPLE SETUP (OCTOBER 5) 
to be filled out on a certain day, the memo that ne eds to be reviewed 
then, the telephone note that needs action on a spe cific date, etc.). 
In order for the system to work, you must update it  every 
day. If you forget to empty the daily file, you won 't trust the sys- 
tem to handle important data, and you'll have to ma nage those 
things some other way. If you leave town (or don't access the file 
on the weekend), you must be sure to check the fold ers for the 
days you'll be away, before you go. 
175 
CHAPTER 7  |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
176 PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY |  PART TWO 
Checklists: Creative Reminders 
The last topic in personal system organization that  deserves some 
attention is the care and feeding of checklists, th ose recipes of 
potential ingredients for projects, events, and areas of value, inter- 
est, and responsibility. 
The most creative checklists are often generated at  the back 
end of a good consulting process with a team or com pany. Good 
ones also show up as areas of focus for training st aff or hiring into 
job slots. 
When I'm clearing in-baskets with clients and revie wing 
other things they're concerned about, we often run across little 
"Memos to Self" like: 
• Exercise more regularly. 
• Make sure we have evaluation forms for each trainin g. 
• Spend more quality time with my kids. 
• Do more proactive planning for the division. 
• Maintain good morale with my team. 
• Ensure we are in alignment with corporate strategy.
• Keep the client billing process up to date. 
What should you do with these "fuzzier" kinds of in ternal 
commitments and areas of attention? 
First, Clarify Inherent Projects and Actions 
For much of this kind of "stuff," there is still a project and/or an 
action that needs to be defined. "Exercise more reg ularly" really 
translates for many people into "Set up regular exe rcise program" 
(project) and "Call Sally for suggestions about per sonal trainers" 
(real action step). In such cases, inherent projects and actions still 
need to be clarified and organized into a personal system. 
But there are some things that don't quite fit into that 
category. 
CHAPTER 7  I  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
Blueprinting Key Areas of Work and Responsibility 
Objectives like "Maintain good physical conditionin g" or "Physi- 
cal health and vitality" may still need to be built  into some sort of 
overview checklist that will be reviewed regularly.  You have multi- 
ple layers of outcomes and standards playing on you r psyche and 
your choices at any point in time, and knowing what  those are, at 
all the different levels, is always a good idea. 
I suggested earlier that there are at least six lev els of your 
"work" that could be defined, and that each level d eserves its own 
acknowledgment and evaluation. A complete inventory  of every- 
thing you hold important and are committed to on ea ch of those 
levels would represent an awesome checklist. It mig ht include: 
• Career goals 
• Service 
• Family 
• Relationships 
• Community 
• Health and energy 
• Financial resources 
• Creative expression 
And then moving down a level, within your job, you 
might want some reminders of your key areas of resp onsibility, 
your staff, your values, and so on. A list of these  might contain 
points like: 
• Team morale 
• Processes 
• Timelines 
• Staff issues 
• Workload 
• Communication 
177 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY | PART TWO 
All of these items could in turn be included on the  lists in 
your personal system, as reminders to you, as neede d, to keep the 
ship on course, on an even keel. 
The More Novel the Situation, the More Control Is R equired 
The degree to which any of us needs to maintain che cklists and 
external controls is directly related to our unfami liarity with the 
area of responsibility. If you've been doing what y ou're doing for a 
long time, and there's no pressure on you to change  in that area, 
you probably need minimal external personal organiz ation to stay 
on cruise control. You know when things must happen , and how 
to make them happen, and your system is fine, statu s quo. Often, 
though, that's not the case. 
Many times you'll want some sort of checklist to he lp you 
maintain a focus until you're more familiar with wh at you're 
doing. If your CEO suddenly disappeared, for exampl e, and you 
had instantly to fill his shoes, you'd need some ov erviews and 
outlines in front of you for a while to ensure that  you had all the 
mission-critical aspects of the job handled. And if  you've just been 
hired into a new position, with new responsibilitie s that are rela- 
tively unfamiliar to you, you'll want a framework o f control and 
, structure, if only for the first few months. 
There have been times when I needed to make a list of areas 
that I had to handle, temporarily, until things wer e under control. 
For instance, when my wife and I decided to create a 
brand-new   structure   for   a   business   we'd   been 
involved with for many years, I took on areas of 
responsibility I'd never had to deal with before—
namely, accounting, computers, marketing, legal, an d 
administration. For several months I needed to keep
a checklist of those responsibilities in front of m e to 
ensure that I filled in the blanks everywhere and m anaged the 
transition as well as I could. After the business g ot onto "cruise 
control" to some degree, I no longer needed that li st. 
178 Checklists can be 
highly useful to let 
you know what you 
don't need to be 
concerned about. 
CHAPTER 7 |  ORGANIZING: SETTING UP THE RIGHT BUCKETS 
Checklists at All Levels 
Be open to creating any kind of checklist as the ur ge strikes you. 
The possibilities are endless—from "Core Life Value s" to "Things 
to Take Camping." Making lists, ad hoc, as they occ ur to you, is 
one of the most powerful yet subtlest and simplest procedures 
that you can install in your life. 
To spark your creative thinking, here's a list of s ome of the 
topics of checklists I've seen and used over the ye ars: 
• Personal Affirmations (i.e., personal value stateme nts) 
• Job Areas of Responsibility (key responsibility are as) 
• Travel Checklist (everything to take on or do befor e a trip) 
• Weekly Review (everything to review and/or update o n a weekly 
basis) 
• Training Program Components (all the things to hand le when 
putting on an event, front to back) 
• Clients 
• Conference Checklist (everything to handle when put ting on a 
conference) 
• Focus Areas (key life roles and responsibilities) 
• Key People in My Life/Work (relationships to assess  regularly 
for completion and opportunity development) 
• Organization Chart (key people and areas of output to manage 
and maintain) 
• Personal Development (things to evaluate regularly to ensure 
personal balance and progress) 
Get comfortable with checklists, both ad hoc and mo re per- 
manent. Be ready to create and eliminate them as re quired. 
Appropriately used, they can be a tremendous asset in personal 
productivity. 
If in fact you have now collected everything that represents an open 
loop in your life and work, processed each one of those items in 
179 
PRACTICING STRESS-FREE PRODUCTIVITY  |  PART TWO 
terms of what it means to you and what actions are required, and 
organized the results into a complete system that holds a cur rent 
and complete overview—large and small—of all your p resent 
and 
"someday" projects, then you're ready for the next phase of imple- 
mentation in the art of stress-free productivity—th e review 
process. \
180