Handbook on Time Management Skills
43b. Drop-in Visitors:  Taking time-log of visits and implementing a plan to arrange and
screen appointments is an effective way of dealing with drop-in visitors. Managers
can also have ‘Open Door’ and ‘Quiet Hour” timings fixed so that they are not distracted
when certain of their tasks demand undivided personal attention.
c. Meetings:  Setting a clear agenda before will provide the right direction to the meetings
and elicit positive outcomes from them. Selecting an appropriate location and
assessing the needs of participation, information and coordination are also important
prerequisites in conducting meetings. Concise minutes summarizing decisions,assignments and deadlines followed by effective follow-up on decisions make
meetings purposeful.Time - Saving Tips : Interruptions
•   Close your door
•   Distinguish between necessary visits
    and interruptions
•   Use different techniques
    - Visit others
    - Arrange appointment
    - Leave your office
    - Establish regular meeting time11  Overcoming Barriers to Effective Time Management
a. Telephone Interruptions:  Delegation of authority and responsibility is an ideal way
of controlling telephone interruptions. Also fixing specific time slots for socializing andbusiness will help the managers effectively reduce the telephone interruptions.
Implementation of the screening procedures also lessen the burden of unwanted
telephone intrusions.
Soft Skills for Public Managers
44d. Lack of Priorities:  Putting first things first helps managers spend relatively more
time on activities that are important. Managers must realize that most of the problemsarise due to action without thought. Defining clearly the objectives and priorities and
deadlines in the form of a Daily Planner will help managers effectively use their time.
e. Personal Disorganization:  Managers must recognize that personal disorganization,
indecision, procrastination, insecurity, confusion of priority, and inability to meet
deadlines are mostly due to lost documents. Uncluttered desk, orderly filing systemand simplified procedures will help the managers make the most of time management.
Through a system in place for screening junk mails, minimizing paperwork and
emphasis on brevity, managers can overcome their personal disorganization.Time - Saving Tips : Meetings
•   Request agenda
•   Arrive early•   Notify chair if your will be late•   Avoid routine, emergency, impromptu
    meetings
•   Avoid Monday mornings, Friday
    afternoons
Time - Saving Tips : Managing E-mails
•   Know your system’s special features
•   List serves•   Same time every day•   Use Web services - (examples)    - IFAP.ed.gov
    - NASFAA Today New
Handbook on Time Management Skills
45f. Ineffective Delegation:  Managers must ensure that clear, unambiguous
instructions are given to the subordinates. They should establish plans, schedules
with details, progress reports, monitoring of deadlines, and emphasize goal-accomplishment methods and procedures. They should measure results rather
than activity and track progress of an activity to take timely corrective actions.
g. Attempting too much:  Managers must set their objectives, priorities, and
deadlines daily so that they must plan, start early and always remember Murphy’s
2
nd Law: “Recognize that everything takes longer than you think”. They must limit
their response to the urgent and important demands. They should learn to say“No” when necessary.
h. Unclear Communication:  Managers must assess the legitimate needs for
information and check for interference, noise or activity in the flow of information.
They should also assess potential impact of unclear communication, take preventive
steps and minimize organizational levels. If it is difficult to minimize organizationallevels, they should facilitate easy flow of information across the organization.
i. Inadequate, Inaccurate or Delayed Information:  Managers must determine
what information is needed for planning, decisions and feedback on results. Thenthey should ensure its availability, reliability and timeliness.
j. Indecision/ Procrastination:  Managers must set deadlines on all objectives and
priorities, use reminders, have the secretary check on the progress, reward
themselves (no coffee until they finish). They should avoid fixing blame; ask what’s
been learned and how repetition can be avoided.
k. Confused Authority / Responsibility:  Managers must lay emphasis on
accountability for results; through recognition and reward for exercise of initiative;
through citation, consideration in performance and salary review, promotion, etc.
l. Inability to say ‘No’:  Managers must recognize that inability to say ‘No’ is a major
cause of time wastage. They should understand that saying “Yes” may betray
Soft Skills for Public Managers
46feelings of insecurity and low self-worth and should resist this urge. They should
take time log recording all “Yes” responses that could have been “No” and assess
the time wasted. They should learn to say “No”, especially to inappropriate orthoughtless requests. Dr Mackenzie suggests four steps to say NO and it is
presented in the BOX on the next page for quick reference.
Dr. Mackenzie’s Four Steps to Saying “No.”
1. Listen
This lets the requesting person know you’re giving full attention to the request and lets
you fully understand what is being asked.
2. Say “No” politely but firmly right away
Don’t build false hopes with wishy-washy answers.
3. Give your reasons, if appropriate
Your reasons may include your priorities, your schedule, etc. This reinforces your
credibility.
4. Offer alternatives, if possible
Demonstrate your good faith by suggesting other ways to meet the person’s need.
There are many ways to say “No” after listening to a request that you simplycannot handle.
Dr. Mackenzie offers a few:
• “I’m sorry, my other commitments just won’t permit me to take on another project rightnow.”
• “You know, on New Year’s Day I promised my family I wouldn’t take on anything else
this year. I’ve been neglecting them too much.”• “Thanks for the compliment, but I’m afraid I’ll have to decline. maybe next year.”
• If a request catches you off-guard, don’t say anything until you count to ten first.
Handbook on Time Management Skills
47m. Leaving tasks unfinished:  Managers must take time log and assess the impact of
leaving tasks unfinished. They should set deadlines on all important tasks to provide
incentive to complete them. They should get organized to permit effective control oftasks. They should recognize that sound organization saves time in retrieving
information, processing decisions, and maintaining control over projects.
n. Lack of Self-Discipline:  When a manager switches priorities of his team, he makes
self-discipline difficult to practice. S/he should take time log to record frequency, assess
cost, discuss with colleagues to seek ways of reducing problem.
Soft Skills for Public Managers
48Time-Wasters: Causes & Solutions
Lack of planning Failure to see the
benefit of planningRecognize that planning may
take time but it saves time
and effort in the long run.
Lack of planningAction-oriented
(perhaps not action-oriented
otherwise the above point is
similar to this)Emphasize results,
not activity.
Lack of planning Success withoutRecognize that success is
often in spite of, not because
of, methods.
Lack of priorities Lack of goals and
objectivesWrite down goals and
objectives. Discuss priorities
with co-workers and familymembers.
Over-commitment Broad interests
(Impractical)
Confusion in prioritiesLearn to say no.
Re-assesses your goalsand priorities
Over-commitment Failure to set
priorities/Over AmbitiousDevelop a personal
philosophy regarding time.
Relate priorities to aschedule of events
Management by crisis Lack of planning Apply the same solutions
as for lack of planning.
Management by crisis Unrealistic time estimates Allow more time. Allow for
interruptions.
Management by crisis Problem oriented Be opportunity oriented
Management by crisis Reluctance of others to
break bad newsEncourage fast transmission
of information via grapevines
as essential for timelycorrective action
Telephone Lack of self-discipline Screen and group calls.
Be brief.
Telephone Desire to be informed and
involvedStay uninvolved with all but
essentials. Manage by
exception.
Meetings Fear of responsibility for
decisions.Make decisions without
meetings.
Meetings Indecision Make decisions even when
some facts are missing.              Time Waster                   Possible Causes                        Solutions
Handbook on Time Management Skills
49Meetings Over-communication Discourage unnecessary
meetings. Convene onlythose needed.
Meetings Poor leadership Use agendas. Stick to the
subject. Prepare concise
minutes as soon as possible.
Meetings Indecision Lack of confidence in the
facts. Improve fact finding
and validating procedures.
Meetings Insistence on all the facts;
paralysis by analysisAccept risks as inevitable.
Decide without all facts.
Meetings Fear of consequences of
a mistakeDelegate the right to be
wrong. Use mistakes as a
learning process.
Meetings Lack of a rational decision-
making process.Get facts, set goals,
investigate alternatives andnegative consequences,
make the decision, then
implement it.
Lack of delegation Fear of subordinates’
inadequacy.Train. Allow mistakes.
Replace if necessary.
Lack of delegation Fear of subordinates’
competenceDelegate fully. Give credit.
Challenge the potential andreward merit.
Lack of delegation Work overload on
subordinatesBalance the workload.
Reorder priorities.
Haste Impatience with detail Take time to get it right. Save
the time of doing it over.
Haste Responding to the urgent Distinguish between the
urgent and the important.
Haste Lack of planning ahead Take time to plan. It repays
itself many times over.
Haste Attempting too much in too
little time.Attempt less, delegate much
more.
Paperwork & reading Knowledge explosion Read selectively. Learn
speed reading.
Paperwork & reading “Computeritis” Manage computer data by
exception.
Paperwork & reading Failure to screen Delegate reading to
subordinates. Ask for
summaries.              Time Waster                   Possible Causes                       Solutions
Soft Skills for Public Managers
50Routine & trivia Lack of priorities Set and concentrate on
priority goals. Delegate
non-essentials.
Routine & trivia Over-surveillance of
subordinatesDelegate; then give
subordinates their right to do
it their way. Look to results,
not details or methods.
Routine & trivia Refusal to delegate; feeling
of greater security dealing
with operating detailRecognize that without
delegation, it is impossible to
grow. Forget perfectionism.
Visitors Enjoyment in socializing Do it elsewhere. Meet visitors
outside work setting.Suggest lunch, if necessary
or hold stand up
conferences.
Visitors Inability to say “no.” Screen. Say no. Be
unavailable. Modify the open
door policy.
Now that you know about these time-wasters, answer the following questions?
1. What time-wasters prevent you from getting your work done on a typical day?2. What are the activities lately that you found were ritualistic and relatively
ineffective?
3. What are the tasks this week that you found could have been delegated?4. What tasks did you do this week that could have been simplified?
5. What single activity or habit that wastes your time most?              Time Waster                   Possible Causes                        Solutions
Handbook on Time Management Skills
51Conclusion
Now that we have come towards the end of the book we have realized that how our time
gets wasted because we never thought of managing time in an effective manner. It is said
that time and tide waits for none so our attempts would be to make the best use of time
and prevent others from wasting our time too. This chapter winds up all our observationson time management in this book. It summarizes as to what causes us to waste our time
and suggests solutions to save time as much as possible. It also offers tips to make the
best use of time. As with all the precious resources, time is a scarce resource. The wisdomlies in making the most of it. Horace Mann says:
“Lost, yesterday,
Somewhere between sunrise and sunset,
Two golden hours,Each set with sixty diamond minutes.
No reward is offered,
For they are gone forever”
Soft Skills for Public Managers
52Which of the following Time Enhancers have you tried lately?
• Listen to radio and TV news shows to keep up on the latest news; this should
enable you to skim through newspapers and magazines.
• Limit recreational TV watching to one hour a day.
• Limit all casual, idle, or gossip chatter to five minutes.
• Open and sort through mail as soon as it arrives at your desk or home; handle
each piece only once.
• Using the “automatic dialing and redial’’ telephone to speed up making and
returning phone recalls.
• Use a timer to help you limit phone calls to less than five minutes.
• Hold as few meetings as possible; use an agenda and stick to it; limit the time to
no more than one hour for each meeting.
• Pay each bill on the day it arrives in the mail, keeping the entries in your check-
book accurate and up to date.
• Use daydreaming as a form of stress release or relaxation, and limit it to a total
of fifteen minutes per day.
• Get professional help for personal problems if you find thinking about them
occupies a lot of your free time.
• Use a tape recorder with ear phones to listen to motivational tapes, relaxation
tapes, or soft relaxing music when in traffic or on a commuter bus, train, plane,etc.
• Use a daily schedule book or “date minder’’ to create a log of scheduled activi-
ties to help you review your success at managing your time.
• Bring books and mail to read or a tape recorder to listen to when you have ap-
pointments where you know you will be waiting for a length of time.
• Eliminate naps and extend your nightly sleep time or increase your daily exercise
schedule to increase your energy level.
Handbook on Time Management Skills
53• Eliminate snacking between meals; eat three balanced meals a day
• Give up smoking (cigarettes, cigars or pipes).
• Give up the need for a “quick one’’ at your local bar, tavern, or lounge.
• Exchange alcoholic consumption time for exercise or some other time enhancer.• Go shopping with a list, stick to the list, and leave when you have completed your list.• Avoid browsing shopping unless it is a planned social, couple, or family shopping
activity.
• Find alternative leisure activities that require no betting of legal tender.
Soft Skills for Public Managers
54Study your answer and take steps necessary to eliminate your time wasters.
Time Tips
1. Count all your time as time to be used and make every attempt to get satisfaction
out of every moment.
2.  Find something to enjoy in whatever you do.3.  Try to be an optimist and seek out the good in your life.4.  Find ways to build on your successes.
5.  Stop regretting your failures and start learning from your mistakes.
6.  Remind yourself, “There is always enough time for the important things.” If it is
important, you should be able to make time to do it.
7.  Continually look at ways of freeing up your time.8.  Examine your old habits and search for ways to change or eliminate them.9.  Try to use waiting time-review notes or do practice problems.10. Keep paper or a calendar with you to jot down the things you have to do or notes to
yourself.
11. Examine and revise your lifetime goals on a monthly basis and be sure to include
progress towards those goals on a daily basis.
12. Put up reminders in your home or office about your goals.13. Always keep those long term goals in mind.14. Plan your day each morning or the night before and set priorities for yourself.15. Maintain and develop a list of specific things to be done each day, set your priorities
and then get the most important ones done as soon in the early part of the day asyou can. Evaluate your progress at the end of the day briefly.
16. Look ahead in your month and try and anticipate what is going to happen so you
can better schedule your time.
Handbook on Time Management Skills
5517. Try rewarding yourself when you get things done as you had planned, especially
the important ones.
18. Do first things first.19. Have confidence in yourself and in your judgement of priorities and stick to them
no matter what.
20. When you catch yourself procrastinating-ask yourself, “What am I avoiding?”21. Start with the most difficult parts of projects, then either the worst is done or you
may find you don’t have to do all the other small tasks.
22. Catch yourself when you are involved in unproductive projects and  stop as soon
as you can.
23. Find time to concentrate on high priority items or activities.24. Concentrate on one thing at a time.25. Put your efforts in areas that provide long term benefits.26. Push yourself and be persistent, especially when you know you are doing well.27. Think on paper when possible-it makes it easier to review and revise.28. Be sure and set deadlines for yourself whenever possible.29. Delegate responsibilities whenever possible.30. Ask for advice when needed.
Adapted from A. Lakein. How to Get Control of Your Time and Your Life
Soft Skills for Public Managers
56Appendix
Time Management Facts and Figures
80% of “crisis management” events are preventable.One hour of planning will save 10 hours of doing.
Good time managers do not allocate their time to those who “demand” it, but
rather to those who “deserve” it.
The most powerful word in our time management vocabulary is “no.”
Delegation is an unlimited method to multiply time for achieving results.
The hardest part about delegation is simply letting go “If you want a job done
right, you have to do it yourself.”
Dr. Donald E. Wetmore -Productivity Institute
Time Management Facts and Figures
- Nine out of 10 people daydream in meetings.
- 60% of meeting attendees take notes to appear as if they are listening.
- When someone is asking for our time for a meeting, 80% of the time there is an
alternate date and time that will be acceptable.
Dr. Donald E. Wetmore -Productivity Institute