Handbook on Time Management Skills
199   Elements of Effective Time Management
Time goes by at the same rate no matter what one does. One can not speed it up or slow
it down. Unlike the other resources that one manages, there is no way to control time. The
best one can do is take charge of oneself in the framework of time, investing oneself in
those things that matter most in one’s life.
Effective time management requires reducing the impact of the time stealers and increasing
the effectiveness of a manager in getting the things done that need to be done. The followingare the important elements that combine to enable a manager eliminate distractions,
interruptions and inefficiencies in the work process to make the most of time management.
A. Evaluating How Time is Used
The first step of effective time management is identifying how a manager is using his time.
This can be done by –
I. Activity Time Log:  The first step to managing time better is to find out how managers
are currently spending their time. Keeping a Time Log is a very effective way to do this.
Through an Activity Time Log, managers can make a list of the activities or tasks that theyspend time on. The very act of measuring is often enough to raise their unconscious habits
into their consciousness, where they then have a chance to scrutinize and change them.
Soft Skills for Public Managers
20Daily Activity Time Log
Time Log requires that managers track all the tasks – including the routine tasks such as
commuting, reading a newspaper, eating and attending telephone etc. - in a systematic way andnote the successive sequence from the start, through the end of the day.Start Time End Time Activity Description
Handbook on Time Management Skills
211. Using the daily log on the worksheet, record your activities for a 24-hour period.
2. Include the start and end times for each activity.3. If more space is needed, continue keeping the log on the back or on another sheet
of paper.
Pick activity categories that will encompass the entire day. Label those below and add up
the total time spent on that particular activity category. Include a miscellaneous category
for things that do not fit well into typical categories. Keeping the Activity Log for several
days helps managers analyze their time and answer questions like:
• What is the most productive period of time?
• What is the least productive time?
• Did they achieve their goals?• How could they have done what they were doing more effectively?
Activity logs are valuable tools for scrutinizing the way managers use their time. They can
also help managers to track changes in their energy, alertness and effectiveness through-
out the day. By examining their activity log, they will be able to discover and obviate time-wasting or low-yield jobs. They will also know the times of day at which they are the most
effective, so that they can carry out their most important tasks during those times.
Studies reveal that managers do a miniscule of real work per day – 1.5 hours of actual
work per day. The rest of the time is spent socializing, taking coffee breaks, eating, engaging
in non-productive communication, shuffling papers and other preventable time-wasters.Misc.
Total Time
(should equal
24 hours)Activity
CategoryTotal Time
Soft Skills for Public Managers
22Analyzing The Daily Time Log
After completing your  Daily Time Log, take a few moments to analyze your results.
This analysis will give you a clear picture on how you spend your time and how you can
improve.1. Did you have a plan for each day with clear priorities in writing?
2. Were you doing the right job at the right time?
• What did you do that should not have been done at all?• Could it have been done more effectively at another time?
• Could it have been delegated? If so, to whom can it be delegated?
3. What could be done in a better way?• Faster
• More simply
• In less detail• With better results
4. Concerning interruptions:
• How are you interrupted (phone, visitors, meetings, crises, self, boss, clients)?
• How often are you interrupted?
• For how long have you been interrupted?• How important were the interruptions?
• How long does it take to recover—to get back on track?
• How many interrupted tasks were left unfinished at the end of the day?5. Concerning contacts/ communications with others:
• How important is time spent in accordance with your real priorities?
• Who (with the right person) are they?• How often do you spend with them?
• How long?
6. To what extent did you reach your goals?
Source: Mackenzie, R. Alec. The Time Trap, 2nd rev. ed., NY: ANACOM, American Management
Association, 1990.
Handbook on Time Management Skills
23Based on the analysis of Activity Time Log over some period, it is possible for managers
to calculate their daily efficiency ratio.  Daily efficiency ratio is the amount of time spent by
managers on the work divided by the total amount of time they spent in the office.
Efficiency Ratio = (Time Doing “Real Work”) / (Time Spent “At Work”)
Assuming that managers have done only 15 hours of actual productive time in a week (60
hrs), the Daily Efficiency Ratio of a manager is only 25% of the time.
B. Goal-Setting
Why is goal-setting so important in time management? From the time management
perspective, a person’s life is a sequence of big and small choices and decisions. It is
those choices that a person really manages, not the flow of time. A key difference between
successful and unsuccessful managers is the quality and practicality of the goals they setfor themselves. Goals state clearly the measurable and specific results to be accomplished
by the managers and the timeframe to attain them.
Goal-setting is the wisdom that comes from practical experience that helps managers
direct their conscious and subconscious decisions towards success. The process of setting
goals helps managers choose where they want to go in personal and professional life. Bybeing aware of precisely what they want to achieve, they know the efforts required for it.
Goals help in monitoring the day to day activities and ensure the activities are progressing
in the right direction. There are two types of goals managers can set for themselves –rational goals and directional goals. Rational goals are specific, short-time goals focusing
on the questions-
• What do I want to accomplish?
• Why am I doing this task?• Who are all involved in the task?
• What are the expected outcomes of this task?
• When can this task be expected to be completed?
Soft Skills for Public Managers
24Directional goals (also known as domain planning) are long-term goals with no predictable
outcomes, focusing on the question - What do I want to accomplish? To stay focused,
managers should aim and visualize these goals. They should identify possible quartersfrom where they can pool up the support and required resources needed to put together
and accomplish those goals.
Time Management Goal Planner
Lifetime Goals (long range)
•        1.
•        2.•        3.•        4.
One-year goals (medium range)
•        1.•        2.•        3.•        4.
One-month goals (short range)
•        1.•        2.•        3.•        4.
Pick two top priority goals from each category. Enter them here. These are the goals,
you will begin to work on, now.
•        1.
•        2.•        3.•        4.•        5.•        6.
The above six top priority goals should occupy a manager’s time for one month. Next
month, they should make a new list. Some goals will remain top priority while others willdrop off. The goals will always be accompanied by a list of specific, easy to accomplish
Handbook on Time Management Skills
25steps. They should set aside a certain time each day to work on top priority goals. Emphasis
should be on results rather than activity.
What makes a good goal? A good goal is one that when followed, offers a reasonably
high probability of success in the defined time-frame. Gene Donohue (“Goal Setting
Powerful Written Goals in 7 Easy Steps!”) lays down the following 7 goal setting steps for
the managers to follow that help in building the road map to good goals.
•1. Make sure the goal you are working for is something you really want, not
just something that sounds good : When setting goals it is very important for the
managers to remember that the goals are compatible with their personal interests
and values. Any inherent conflict or incompatibility will cause unwarranted friction
and adversely impact accomplishment of the goals.
•2. A goal cannot contradict any of your other goals:  Non-integrated thinking
can also sabotage all the hard work managers put into their goals. Non-integrated
thinking can also hamper their everyday thoughts. Managers should continually striveto eliminate contradictory ideas from their thinking.
•3. Develop goals in the 6 areas of life:  Setting goals in each area of life will
ensure a more balanced life as managers begin to examine and change the
fundamentals of everyday living. Setting goals in each area of life also helps in
eliminating the non-integrated thinking. The six areas of life that need goal-settinginclude –
•Family and Home              
•Physical and Health
•Mental and Educational
•Financial and Career
•Spiritual and Ethical          
•Social and Cultural            
Soft Skills for Public Managers
26•4. Write down your goals:  The difference between a goal and a dream is the
written word. Writing down the goals creates the roadmap to success. Although the
mere act of writing them down can set the process in motion, it is also extremelyimportant to review the goals frequently. The more focused the managers are on
their goals, the more likely they are to accomplish them.
•5. Write your goal in the positive instead of the negative:  The subconscious
mind can not determine right from wrong and it does not judge. It’s only function is
to carry out its instructions. The more positive instructions one gives it, the more
positive results one will get.
•6. Write your goal out in complete detail.  Writing down goals in details is once
again giving the subconscious mind a detailed set of instructions to work on. Themore information one gives it, the more clear the final outcome becomes. The more
precise the outcome, the more efficient the subconscious mind can become.
•7. By all means, make sure your goal is high enough:  Keeping in view the
time and resources at their disposal, managers should set fairly high but practicable
goals. Lower goals are indicators of lower motivational levels on the part of
managers. Higher goals are pointers to the zest managers have toward their work.
Apart from the above, traditional goal-setting wisdom teaches that a good goal must be
believable, specific and measurable, and have a deadline.
Managers must believe that it is possible for them to achieve the goal or they will not be
motivated to try. The goals should also be measurable and specific enough for them to
know unambiguously whether they have been completed yet or not. For goals to bemeaningful, managers must know the time-frame by when they are to be accomplished.
Reviewing your goals daily is a crucial part of a manager’s success and must become
part of his/her routine. At the beginning of each day, they must take stock of the list of goals
and identify the efforts required on their part, for the day, to accomplish each of the goals
by the set deadline. Each night, they should review the goals to ascertain whether the
Handbook on Time Management Skills
27required work has been done or not. This process will set their subconscious and conscious
minds working towards the goal. This will also begin to replace any of the negative self-talk
they may indulge in and replace it with positive self-talk.
A manager’s time can best be directed by using goals. Without goals, they become easily
side-tracked and waste time.
C. Defining Priorities
Prioritizing means “taking conscious control of one’s choices and deciding to spend more
time on the activities and tasks that are important and valuable, and less time on the onesthat are not....” The importance of prioritizing tasks or activities is best driven home by the
popular ‘pebbles and jar’ parable.
One day, an expert in time management was speaking to a group of managers. As he
stood in front of the group of high-powered over-achievers he said, “Okay, time for a quiz”
and he pulled out a one-gallon, wide-mouth mason jar and set it on the table in front of him.He also produced about a dozen fist-sized rocks and carefully placed them, one at a time,
into the jar. When the jar was filled to the top and no more rocks would fit inside, he asked,
“Is this jar full?” Everyone yelled, “Yes.”
The time management expert replied, “Really?” He reached under the table and pulled out
a bucket of gravel. He dumped some gravel in and shook the jar causing pieces of gravel
to work themselves down into the spaces between the big rocks. He then asked the grouponce more, “Is the jar full?”
“Probably not,” one of them answered.
“Good!” he replied. He reached under the table and brought out a bucket of sand. He
started dumping the sand in the jar and it went into all of the spaces left between the rocks
and the gravel. Once more he asked the question, “Is this jar full?”
“No!” the audience shouted.
Soft Skills for Public Managers
28Once again he said, “Good.” Then he grabbed a pitcher of water and began to pour it in
until the jar was filled to the brim. Then he looked at the spectators and asked, “What is the
point of this illustration?”
One eager beaver raised his hand and said, “The point is, no matter how full your schedule
is, if you try really hard you can always fit some more things in it!”
“No,” the speaker replied, “that’s not the point. The truth this illustration teaches us is, “If
you don’t put the big rocks in first, you’ll never get them in at all.
What are the ‘big rocks’ in your life, time with loved ones, your faith, your education, your
dreams, a worthy cause, teaching or mentoring others?
Remember to put these BIG ROCKS in first or you’ll never get them in at all. So, tonight, or
in the morning, when you are reflecting on this short story, ask yourself this question, “What
are the ‘big rocks’ in my life?” Then, put those in your jar first.
Time management expert Alec Mackenzie in The Time Trap narrates an anecdote that
underscores the importance of prioritizing activities.
As the story goes, an efficiency consultant by the name of Ivy Lee was meeting with the
president of a large steel mill. The president, one Charles Schwab, was interested to
find out how he could increase performance. Lee was telling Schwab how he could
provide him with advice to better manage the company. Schwab, however, was notinterested because he did not want more knowledge. Instead, he wanted to find out how
to get more done within available time, and he was willing to pay anything within reason
for such advice. Lee said that he could help him increase his efficiency by at least 50%provided he could have about 20 minutes of his time.
After Schwab consented, Lee gave him a blank piece of paper and told him to write
down the six most important things he wanted to accomplish tomorrow. Schwab thoughtabout it and completed the task in about three minutes. Then Lee instructed him to order
these things from most important to least important. That, too, took very little time. Now
Handbook on Time Management Skills
29the executive was instructed to keep the list until the following morning, at which time he
was asked to look at the first item and to start working on it until it was completed. After
that he was told to work on task number two and so on until the end of the day. Lee furtheradvised Schwab not to worry about those tasks that he could not get done, since it didn’t
matter because they would not have gotten done anyway.
Then Schwab was asked to repeat this process every working day. Lee then told him to
try this system as long as he likes. Lee also asked Schwab to have his employees try
this system and, if it worked, to send him a check for whatever the idea was worth to him
and the company. After several months, Lee received a check for $25,000 and a letter inwhich Schwab said that this was one of the most profitable ideas that he had ever been
taught. It is further reputed that the consistent application of this strategy helped to turn
this small steel mill into Bethlehem Steel.
Managers must realize that they cannot simply do task or activity they take up. Given the
constraints of time and resources, they have to be selective and consciously choose tospend time on what is most important to them. They have to keep in mind is that whenever
they start an activity or task, they are inevitably ruling out everything else they could have
done with that time.
When managers have to choose among several tasks, they can use several prioritization
tools. The key ones are summarized below. It can be very helpful at times to break out of
their routine way of looking at things and to use a tool that they do not use all of the time.
Covey’s Quadrants
Discussed earlier under Time Matrix, Steven Covey describes a high-level prioritization
Time Management Grid in his book 
The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People . In this
grid, tasks are categorized by four quadrants:
Soft Skills for Public Managers
30• Quadrant 1 represents things which are both urgent and important - labelled
“firefighting”. The activities need to be dealt with immediately, and they are important.
• Quadrant 2 represents things which are important, but not urgent - labelled “Quality
Time”. Although the activities here are important, and contribute to achieving thegoals and priorities - they do not have to be done right now. As a result, they can be
scheduled when they can be given quality thought to them. A good example would
be the preparation of an important talk, or mentoring a key individual. Prayer time,family time and personal relaxation/recreation are also part of Quadrant 2.
• Quadrant 3 represents distractions. They must be dealt with right now, but frankly,
are not important. For example, when a person answers an unwanted phone call, -
he/she has had to interrupt whatever he/she is doing to answer it.
• The final quadrant, Quadrant 4, represents things which are neither urgent nor
important. Some meetings could fall into this category – they have been scheduled
in advance, but if they achieve nothing, then they have simply wasted time. Other
examples could include driving time and low quality relaxation or family time.
Using the Tool:
Managers must strive to maximize Quadrant 2 time. They should allocate time in the diaryto carry out these tasks when they are at their best. Doing so can reduce the amount of
time taken up by firefighting quadrant 1 activities, since many quadrant 1 activities couldTime Management Grid
UrgencyImportanceQuadrant  1
Urgent and Important
“Firefighting”Quadrant  2
Important but Not Urgent
“Quality Time”
Quadrant  3 Urgent
But not Important
“Distraction”Quadrant  4
Neither Urgent nor
Important.
“Time wasting”
Handbook on Time Management Skills
31have been quadrant 2 if they had been done earlier. Managers can also seek to reduce
time spent in Quadrant 3 by improving the systems and processes for dealing with
distractions, and they can eliminate as much as possible of quadrant 4 activities, by either
not spending time on these things, or changing the nature of them to make them moreproductive. For example, driving can be quadrant 4 if the time is unproductive, but there
are a number of ways of making this time more productive by learning new skills, planning
and so on.
Ken Blanchard’s Quadrants
Ken Blanchard - the author of the popular book “The One Minute Manager” and “The On-Time, On-Target Manager” – sets out his quadrants a little differently:
• Have to Do, Want to Do
• Have to Do, Don’t Want to Do• Don’t Have to Do, Want to Do• Don’t Have to Do, Don’t Want to Do
Most of the managers do not have a problem with Quadrants 1 and 4. If It is Quadrant 1,
they will willingly do it. If it is Quadrant 4, they never do it. It is Quadrants 2 and 3 where the
conflict is likely to arise and most of the managers are likely to be attracted to Quadrant 3,
meaning things that do not have to be done  get done.
The Blanchard advice for the managers is to take up tasks in the order of Quadrant 2 and
Quadrant 1, and spend little or no time on Quadrant 3 items. To use this model, managershave to chart out to-do list and plan accordingly.
Paired Comparison
The Simple Paired Comparison method uses a simple scoring system for comparing
activities. The following example illustrates how this method can be applied:
Here is the list of example tasks or activities to be performed:1. Call home about dinner plans
Soft Skills for Public Managers
322. Fire Venkat
3. Draft budget report
4. Respond to e-mails
Compare the following and put a check mark against the relatively important task of each
comparison:
• 1 to 2, 1 to 3, 1 to 4
• 2 to 3, 2 to 4• 3 to 4
Let’s say the result is as follows:
1. Call home about dinner plans XX
2. Fire Venkat XXX
3. Draft budget report X
4. Respond to e-mails  
So, the order you would do the tasks in would be 2, 1, 3, 4.
The ABC Method
The ABC method ranks tasks into the following categories:
- ‘A’ are activities which Absolutely must get done now
- ‘B’ are those that Better get done soon- ‘C’ are those that could wait for now- ‘D’ are those that can be Delegated but require follow up
Then it subdivides tasks in these categories into A1, A2, A3, ..., B1, B2, ... and so forth.
A lot of people find this prioritization method helpful.
Handbook on Time Management Skills
33The Payoff versus Time Method
With this method, the managers have to weigh each task by the payoff they expect
from it versus the time it takes to do it. Tasks that have high payoff and that take little
time are the ones they would take up first. Correspondingly, tasks that have low payoff
and that take a lot of time are ones they would do last or not do them at all.
Whichever method one uses - whether a particular method listed above, a combination
of methods, or one of one’s own design – a manager should use it not only to rank the
order in which they will do things, but also to defer or eliminate items that are not
important or of least priority.
D. Scheduling Activities
After identifying the activities and prioritizing them, it is time to create a schedule. When
scheduling, it is important to plan a weekly schedule as well as a daily schedule. The
weekly schedule is important for the overall success of the activities and tasks, but it is thedaily planning that will help one to track one’s progress and determine whether or not one
is on schedule.
Managers should try using significant project milestones in their weekly planning but for
daily planning break each milestone down into the necessary components and plan the
completion of those components on a daily basis. It is helpful to keep one’s schedule in anappointment book or electronic organizer, but for purposes of planning one can use a
scheduling grid as follows.
Time Management Tools
•   Master List
•   Calendar
•   Prioritized Task List•   Paper
•   Directory
Soft Skills for Public Managers
34The following points demonstrate why scheduling is so critical to success.
• Scheduling can greatly reduce your stress quotient. Proper scheduling gives one
the peace of mind of knowing that one has formulated a feasible plan of action and
that one’s goals are attainable.
• Scheduling also helps one to be prepared for obstacles because part of the
scheduling process is creating a contingency plan for unexpected problems.
• Scheduling serves as a way to evaluate your progress as you work. Planning your
daily and weekly activities will clearly illustrate whether or not you are staying on
schedule.
Tool 1 : Master List
•   Begin with items from your desktop
•   Quick reference of ongoing activities•   Include due dates
•   Include personal and professional goals
Tool 1 : Master List
•   Keep track of delegated work
•   Establish and set goals•   Orgnize larger projects
    - Break down into smaller task
    - Daily task lists
    - Expect the unexpected
Handbook on Time Management Skills
35When scheduling the activities, ideally managers should follow the below procedure:
•Block out times on the schedule for each of the major activities.
•Start with recurring activities that occur at a fixed time
•Then block out time for activities that they want to do on a regular basis
•Allot ample time for each activity, especially high priority activities.
•Take into account when they are most effective.  Morning people might schedule
more activities early in the day.  Night owls might schedule things later.
Sample Daily Planner
Name:                                   Day of Week:                                     Date:
T=Top Priority   M=Middle Priority   L=Low Priority
Time   Actually Accomplished           Planned Task To Do Today
7:30
8:00
8:30
9:00
9:30
10:00
10:30
11:00
11:30
Noon
12:30
1:00
1:30
2:00
2:30
3:00
3:30
4:00
4:30
5:00
5:30
Soft Skills for Public Managers
36Work your way down from the top items. Only when they are completed should you work on
the middle priority tasks. Only when everything else is done should you work on the low
priority items. You will find that it is often acceptable to ignore the low priority items. While
scheduling activities, managers need to consider the following points:
10  Essential Steps in Using A Planner
Outlined below is a step-by-step approach for using a day planner to manage time
effectively.
1. Select a Compatible Time Planner:  A day planner is a device that includes a
calendar, space to write “to-do” lists, and space to write telephone numbers,
addresses, and other/ reference information. It can be a Franklin Planner (simple
paper-and-pencil type), Day Timer, a fancy electronic organizer or time management
software on a computer. If techno-savvy, a manager can pick an electronic organizer.
If not, a manager can choose the paper-and-pencil method.
2. Find a Single, Accessible Place to Keep the Planner:  Having selected a planner,
managers should cultivate the habit of keeping it in an exclusively designated andeasily accessible place at home and workplace. An ideal place to keep the planner
could be near the telephone or on the office desk.
3. Enter the Basic in the Day Planner:  Managers should consider what vital
information might be useful to enter in the Planner – such as insurance policy
numbers, computer passwords, telephone numbers, equipment numbers - and
arrange the information in alphabetical order.
Tool 2 : Your Calender
•   Maintain your own calendar
•   Keep one calendar for everything•   Take calendar wherever you go
•   Know your energy cycle
•   Plan every day
Handbook on Time Management Skills
374. Carry the Planner at All Times:  Carrying the planner at all times means that the
managers have all the vital information they need with them all the time. Ideally, the
Day Planner should be their integral part and constant companion of managers.
5. Refer to the Day Planner Regularly:  Managers should make it a habit to refer to
the Day Planner thrice a day – at the start of the day to be sure of the things to bedone, afternoon to monitor the progress of their activities, and night to take stock of
the status of the activities for the day.
6. Use the Day Planner as a Calendar for Everything:  Appointments, and activi-
ties for the day on personal, family and professional fronts should be listed in the
planner. It is advisable that activities relating to family and professions are high-
lighted using different colours. It is also essential that crucial activities or tasks thatneed personal attention and close scrutiny are highlighted using different colours to
review their progress from time to time.
7. Use Day Planner as a ‘Brain Dump’ to Capture Ideas:   Day Planner also doubles
up as a Brain-Dump for managers as they can put down the ideas as they surface
in the planner. That way it helps to refer to them and weigh their value and feasibilityat the appropriate time.Tool 2 : Your Calender
•   Don’t plan every minute
•   Prioritize•   Save peak energy periods for yurself•   Schedule time for routine taks•   Schedule your rewards
Soft Skills for Public Managers
388. Conduct a Daily Planning Session:  The goal of this session is to plan the upcoming
day’s activities and develop a plan of attack and to carry  out the same. In addition to
listing priorities and reviewing schedules, the planning session is the time to considerexactly how each task will be accomplished.  What materials will be needed? Whatobstacles are likely to be encountered? How can these obstacles be overcome? Theplanning session will thus provide a mental map that guides them in carrying out thetasks on the list
9. Prioritize ‘To-Do’ List and Action in Accordance with Priorities:  There are
many ways to prioritize a “to do” list. One way is to number all of the items on the list
in order of decreasing priority. Another way is to classify items into one of threecategories: “Essential,” “Important,” and “Do only if I have extra time.” The managers
should pick the method that best fits their style, and begin prioritizing their daily “to
do” list.Tool 3 : Daily Task List
•   List everything you’d like to accomplish
•   Assign value using “ABC” system•   Assign numerical value to each item
Tool 4 : Notes
•   Carry paper at all times
•   Make notes
•   Use full-sized paper
•   Date notes
•   File in action file folders
Handbook on Time Management Skills
3910.Generate a List of Long-Term Goals and Break the Long-Term Goals into
Small, Manageable Chunks:  First, generate a list of all long-term goals. These
are broad goals to be accomplished over many months and years. Then, take one
goal at a time and break it down into small chunks or sub-goals that might beaccomplished on a monthly basis. Assign one sub-goal to each month of the year.
At the beginning of the month, conduct a monthly planning session to decide how to
accomplish the sub-goal over the course of the month. Assign various tasks to
each week of the month. At the beginning of each week, conduct a weekly planning
session to decide how to assign aspects of that week’s sub-goal to the daily tasklists for the entire week. During each daily planning session, plan the details of the
assigned task that will be performed that day.
E: Personal Action Plan with a Follow-Up
In order to eliminate the time wasters in the work-process, managers need to act to change
them. For them to act and take corrective measures, they need to draw up an action plan.Tool 4 : Telephone/ Address
      Directory
•   Carry It
•   Maintain one directory
•   Transfer business card infomration
•   Include e-mail, fax, home
    address/phone
Soft Skills for Public Managers
40Source: Mackenzie, R. Alec. The Time Trap, 2nd rev. ed., NY: ANACOM, American Management
Association, 1990.Below is a personal action plan, including an example, to help you identify and solve your
daily time wasters.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10Time Waster Cause Solution Date to
StartDate to
Check
ProgressFollow-up
Action
taken
Handbook on Time Management Skills
4110  Getting oriented to manage time
To get ready to manage their time better, managers should answer the following questions:
• What is my time worth? How much do I get paid per hour? If I could save one hour a
day, what would this amount to, in the course of one year?
• What is my job? What results are expected of me? Am I meeting a predetermined,
definable purpose, or am I just drifting?
• What have I been doing? At the end of a day, am I able to account for my time, or do
I say to myself, “Where did the day go? I don’t feel I have accomplished anything.’’
• Have I been doing the right things? Am I involved in work activities that rightfully fall
under the responsibility of my subordinates? What are the five most important tasks
I have to do?
• How am I spending/ investing my time? What results do I see for the time I spend on
each activity? What would happen if some of these things were not done?
• Am I goal-oriented? Am I working toward quantified objectives? Have I established
performance standards for myself? For my people?
• Have I done any planning? When I arrive on the job in the morning, do I know what it
is I want to accomplish during that particular day? Have I established priorities?
Have I determined a hierarchy of importance?
• Have I tried to manage, schedule, control my work and time? Is the job running me
or am I running the job? Am I suffering from “brief caseitis,’’ i.e., bringing home
more and more of my work ?
• Do I delegate all possible tasks? Am I able to hand over more tasks to my co-
workers or staff at work and to my spouse or children at home?
• Does the time I spend on the job affect my lifestyle? Am I enjoying life and having
fun, or am I so stressed from the pressures of poor time management on the job
that the tension carries over into my everyday life?
Soft Skills for Public Managers
42How We Waste Time
•   Lack of discipline
•   Indecisiveness
•   Personal
    Disorganization
•   Procrastination•   Inability to say “NO”
•   Poor Delegation
    Skills
•   Day Dreaming
•   Worry
Time Waste - Caused by Others
•   Telephone
     Interruptions
•   Drop-In Visitors•   Unscheduled
    Meetings
•   Poor
    Communications
•   Confused chain of
     Authority