Soft Skills for Public Managers
10Monochronic Managers
do one thing at a time
concentrate well
take time seriously
low context, need information
are committed to the job
adhere religiously to plans
are concerned with not disturbing
seldom borrow or lend
emphasize promptness
are accustomed to short-term relationshipsPolychronic Managers
do many things at once
are highly distractible and subject to
interruptions
consider time commitments and
objective to be achieved, if possible
high context, have information
are committed to the people
change plans often and easily
are more concerned with
others closeness than privacy
borrow and lend easily
base promptness on the relationship
strong tendency to build lifetime relationships6  Monochronic and Polychronic Views of Time
Just as a person’s overall personality is made up of and represented by his or her
traits, a person’s time personality is made up of a series of time styles – monochronicor polychronic.  It is expected that a person’s awareness of the monochronic/polychronicside of personal time style affects his or her overall approach to time use, perceptionsof time pressure and the amounts and order of time spent on tasks.  This, in turn,affects his or her personal efficiency. 
Monochronic approach to time management is essentially objective and lays empha-
sis on promptness, speed, brevity and punctuality. It is a very efficient and focusedway to manage work and life. Monochronic time managers are those who thrive ondetailed planning and organization. They prefer to focus on one task at a time and theyfollow a schedule from which they don’t like to deviate. They tend to get upset by dis-tractions or interruptions and are inclined to put new tasks off until a later date, whenthey can be worked into the schedule.
Polychronic approach to time management is subjective and lays emphasis on
inspiration, imagination, flexibility, intuition and dedication. Trust, bonding, pleasureand quality of life influence more strongly the decisions of a person who ‘ticks’ inpolychronic time. Polychronic time managers prefer to have many projects under waysimultaneously, enjoy changing from activity to activity and are unflustered bydistractions and interruptions. Unlike their monochronic counterparts, polychronicmanagers believe they perform well under pressure.
Handbook on Time Management Skills
11Clearly, monochronic approach is better suited for dealing with routine and predictable
tasks, while polychronic approach is better suited in dealing with things such as creating a
new concept or resolving an argument. Conflict arises when managers apply a monchronic
style to a situation that demands polychronic time, or managers prefer polychronic stylewhile the situation warrants the use of monchronic style.
So how do the managers cope with a healthy need for subjective, polychronic, self-imposed
time and at the same time fit in with the monochronic and objective time measures? The
only way managers can figure out which method works best in a given situation is based
on sound reasoning and acumen.
How can you get an extra hour out of each day?
Here are some tips to help you squeeze those extra minutes out of your day. Of course,
you can adapt these so that they will fit in with your situation.
1. Get up earlier2. Watch less TV (I mean how many Law & Order spinoffs does one need to
    watch?)
3. Avoid allowing others to waste your time4. If you don’t have to drive to work, use that time to study or plan. If you do
    drive to work listen to a motivational tape on the way to work instead of
    that mindless dj talk.
5. Organize your work; do it systematically.
6. Make creative use of lunchtime.7. Delegate authority if, possible.
8. Spend less time on unimportant phone calls.
9. Think first, and then do the task.10. Do what you dream about doing, instead of just dreaming about it.
11. Work hardest when you’re the most mentally alert
12. Eliminate activities that make the smallest contributions to your life.13. Always do the toughest jobs first.
14. Before each major act ask, “Is this really necessary?”
15. Choose interesting and constructive literature for spare time reading.16. Learn how to sleep. Sleep soundly, then work refreshed.
Soft Skills for Public Managers
1217. Skip desserts.
18. Stop smoking.
19. Write notes or letters while waiting for others.20. Always carry an envelope with paper in it and a few stamps.
21. Combine tasks that are done in the same area.
22. Be prompt for all appointments.23. Lay out your clothes the night before.(I need to remember this myself)
24. Call on specialists to do work that you cannot do efficiently
25. Learn to read more rapidly.26. Take a nap after dinner. Then take a shower. Begin the evening hours
      relaxed and refreshed.
27. Avoid interruptions.28. Avoid making a big production out of tiny tasks.
29. Search out job shortcuts.
30. Know your limitations.
31. Work to your full capacity. I know it’s tough to break bad habits. However,
      it is necessary to make sacrifices so that your business can be successful.
Don’t try to implement all of these ideas at once. Implement them one at a time and
repeat them until they become a part of your daily routine.
Source: http://EzineArticles.com/?expert=DeAnna_Spencer
Handbook on Time Management Skills
137  The ‘Five Time Zone’ Concept
To accelerate the ability to manage their time, managers need to strike a proper balance
between monochronic and polychronic aspects of time management.   The ‘Five TimeZone Concept’ advocated by Lewis, Justus and Storz, Moni Laui (Switch on Your Mind:
Accelerative Learning Strategies at Work.) enables managers to bring about that balance.
The five links in the ‘Five Time Zone’ approach are - vision, plans, personal organisationsystems, commitment and energy.
•Developing Zone 1 - Vision and Goals:  Managers must search for visions, not
tasks. These visions are guided by their personal standards and values, and the
direction they want to take. Once their visions are crystallized, they need to dosome thinking to create goals from their visions and action steps from their goals.
My vision and goals . . .
• What is most important to me?
•  What would I like to do if there were no limitations?•  What things in my life would I like to be different?
•  My visions for myself are . . .
•Developing Zone 2 - Plans:  Having established goals, managers now can move
into zone two - plans. A plan is needed to turn visions and goals into action. Writingthings down and using some form of planning ‘tool’ are keys to successful planning.
Once they have drawn up the plan, they need to review it. They should plan for high-
payoff and low-payoff activities for high and low priorities.
•Developing Zone 3 – Personal Organization Systems (POS):  Zone three
encompasses a manager’s personal organisation system. Organising the desk,follow-up, paperwork, physical environment are all part of personal organization
system. The personal organization system should focus on –
• Creating an interesting and relaxing work-space
• Providing easy access to basic tools and materials
• Grouping similar tasks together to optimize time
Soft Skills for Public Managers
14• Devising a good follow-up system that works well
• Enabling efficient handling of each piece of paper• Ensuring a wider reach of people
My action plan to develop my POS
12
3
45
•Developing Zone 4 – Commitment:  The fourth time zone is the zone of
commitment, in which managers correct any tendencies they might have towardsprocrastination. Procrastination can be overcome by identifying why one is
procrastinating, breaking the mental blocks and visualizing the successful completion
of a task while in a relaxed state. One way to do this it to identify the real reason forthe procrastination - personal, logical, emotional or ethical barrier to action. Once
this has surfaced from the subconscious to the conscious, strategies can be brought
into play to deal with it.
Reasons why I procrastinate . . .
1
2
34
5
•Developing Zone 5 – Energy:  The final factor that keeps the chain together is
zone five, the energy zone. Managers must check their office surroundings, as the
environment they work in can sap or strengthen their energy levels. They must alsoidentify the prime time - the time of day when they are most energetic and alert –
they can schedule high-priority, high-payoff tasks or activities for these times.
• Find your prime time• Internal and external prime time
• Cognitive tasks for the morning
• Complete high-energy tasks in high-energy periods• Take energy breaks
Handbook on Time Management Skills
15Tasks can be categorized as urgent/ not urgent or as important/ not important as shown
below.  Each of a manager’s activities can be distinguished as one of four types,
represented by the four quadrants of the time management matrix. Categorizing a
manager’s activities in these quadrants helps him identify what is important and avoidunimportant tasks and activities. It also helps him prioritize important tasks and activities.Not
ImportantQuadrant   I
Crises, Projects,
accidents, etc.Quadrant   II
Planning, exercise,
relationships, etc.
Quadrant   III
Phone calls, visitors,
small talk, etc.Quadrant   IV
Daydreaming, TV,
procrastination, etc.ImportantUrgent Not UrgentTime Management matrix8  Time Management Matrix
Time management experts like Stephen Covey S R (The Seven Habits of Highly Effective
People; Simon & Schuster) have developed a model called a time management matrix.This model enables managers to prioritize their activities and use their time more effectively.
With the help of the model, they can evaluate their activities in terms of importance and
urgency.
Soft Skills for Public Managers
16The activities in Quadrant 1 are both important and urgent. These include deadline-driven tasks
and important daily chores. The results of operating in this Quadrant are stress, burnout andcrisis management
Not
ImportantImportantUrgent Not Urgent
Quadrant  I Quadrant  II
Quadrant  III Quadrant  IVQ2 : Calm and in controlQ1 : Sruggling to stay ahead
Not
ImportantImportantUrgent Not Urgent
Quadrant  I Quadrant  II
Quadrant  III Quadrant  IV

Handbook on Time Management Skills
17The activities in Quadrant 2 are important but not urgent. These activities are characterized
as preparation, planning, crisis prevention, and deadline-avoiding tasks. Operating in this
Quadrant will mean a manager having a proper perspective, vision, balance, discipline,control and few crises.
The activities in Quadrant 3 are not important but urgently press upon us and interrupt our more
important activities. These include responding to drop-in visitors, phone calls, meetings, andmail that do not increase productivity and effectiveness. Operating in this Quadrant will meanshort-term focus, crisis management, worthlessness of goals and plans, feeling of victimiza-
tion and broken relationships.Q3 : Busy going nowhere
Not
ImportantImportantUrgent Not Urgent
Quadrant  I Quadrant  II
Quadrant  III Quadrant  IV
Soft Skills for Public Managers
18The activities in Quadrant 4 are neither important nor urgent. Busywork, time wasters, junk
mail, and some phone calls are the type of activities that are a part of this quadrant.
Operating in this Quadrant will mean total irresponsibility and over-dependence on others
in addition to outcomes in Quadrant 3.
From a study of the Time Management Matrix, the following observations can be made:
1. Activities in Quadrant I and Quadrant II may be equally important. Some activities in
Quadrant II may even be more important than activities in Quadrant I, but not
necessarily more urgent.
2. Activities in Quadrant I assume critical importance and top priority.
3. Spending most of the time on Activities in Quadrant I results in stress and burnout.
4. Focusing on activities in Quadrant II can reduce the activities in Quadrant I, in the long
run.
5. Focusing on activities in Quadrant II will mean avoiding all unimportant activities in
Quadrant III and IV.Q4 : Aspiring to mediocrity
Not
ImportantImportantUrgent Not Urgent
Quadrant  I Quadrant  II
Quadrant  III Quadrant  IV