Handbook on Time Management Skills
11  Introduction
Understanding Time Management
“We all have time to either spend or waste and it is our decision what to do with it.
But once passed, it is gone forever.”
- Bruce Lee (“Zen in the Martial Arts” by Joe Hyams)
Every individual on earth has the same amount of time - 60 seconds in a minute; 60
minutes in an hour; 1,440 minutes in a day; and 525,600 minutes in a year. While a
vast majority of people confesses faltering to come to grips with it, extremely few can
claim to have made the most of it. How is it that they have got it all done? It’s becausethey have managed a way to figure out how to manage their time effectively.
Time Management is more than just managing time. It is about controlling the use of
the most valuable - and undervalued - resource.  It is managing oneself in relation totime. It is setting priorities and taking charge of the situation and time utilization. Itmeans changing those habits or activities that cause waste of time. It is being willing
to adopt habits and methods to make maximum use of time. 
With good time management skills one is in control of one’s time, stress and energy
levels. One can maintain balance between one’s work and personal life. One findsenough flexibility to respond to surprises or new opportunities. It is not how much timeone has, but rather the way one uses it. The bottom line is how well one manages time.
Internationally known authority on time management Dr. Alec Mackenzie in his book
The Time Trap  argues that the very idea of time management is a misnomer because
one really cannot manage time in the way other resources can be managed: financial
capital, physical capital, human capital, information and time. While each of the first
four can be augmented, reduced, transferred or otherwise controlled, Time cannot bemanipulated. Dr. Mackenzie contends that when it comes to time, one can only 
manage
oneself in relation to it. One cannot control time as one can control other resources –
one can only control how one uses it. In the world in which we live, time cannot be
replaced or re-created. It is therefore not for us to choose whether we spend or save
time but to choose only how we spend it.
Soft Skills for Public Managers
22  Misconceptions about Time
There are several misconceptions which we all have about time. They affect everyone
including those persons who may be considered quite successful and effective. Here aresome of the misconceptions identified by Dr. Mackenzie:
·Time management is simple - all it requires is common sense.
 While it is true
that the concept is simple, the self-discipline required to practice effective time
management is not easy.
·Work is best performed under pressure.  Psychological studies show this to be
no more than an excuse for procrastination. One does not work well under pressure
- only does the best one can under the circumstances. Pressure and challenge
must not be confused. Lara’s performance when the West Indies Team is in trouble
has more to do with application and determination rather than pressure.
·I use a diary, a to-do list and have a secretary to keep me organized.  One
has to keep oneself organized - no one can do it for others. The trouble with the
disorganized person is that he hardly has time to listen to his secretary or look at
his diary.
·I do not have the time.  The effective worker or manager often gets more work
done in the earlier hours of the morning than most laggards get done in the whole
day. He then no longer has to work against tight deadlines and under stress which
contributes to heart problems and not unusually the ultimate reduction of time on
this earth.
·Time management might be good for some kinds of work but my job is
creative. Time management is not about routine: it is about self-discipline. Lack of
discipline prevents one from being great instead of simply good.
·Time management takes away the fun and freedom of spontaneity.   Is working
under stress, forgetting appointments, making constant excuses and apologies to
be fun? Would it not be much more fun if by better organization one had one or two
more hours every day to spend with the family, to play games, read a good book,
plan for tomorrow and the day and week after or just relax?
Handbook on Time Management Skills
3• Management by crisis
• Lack of Planning• Incomplete information• Personal disorganization• Attempting too much• Inability to Say   No• Responsibility unclear• Ineffective delegation• Inadequate staff & resources• Paperwork
• Poor communication• Poorly organized meetings• Leaving tasks unfinished• Inadequate controls• Lack of self-discipline• Socializing• Drop-in visitors• Telephone interruptions
Why do/will I have so little time ?3  Symptoms of Poor Time Management
Poor time management shows up by way of one or a combination of typical perceptible
symptoms. Managers would do well to look for and reflect on whether they are subject to
any of those symptoms with a view to take necessary corrective actions.
The following are some of the indicators of poor time management:
·Constant rushing  (e.g. between meetings or tasks)
·Frequent delays  (e.g. in attending meetings, meeting deadlines)
·Low productivity, energy and motivation  (e.g. ‘I can’t seem to get worked up
about anything’)
·Frustration  (e.g. ‘Oh, things just don’t move ahead)
·Impatience  (e.g. ‘where the hell is that information I’ve asked him for?’)
·Chronic vacillation between alternatives  (e.g. ‘whichever option I choose it is
going to put me at a big disadvantage. I don’t know which way to jump’)
·Difficulty setting and achieving goals  (e.g. ‘I’m not sure what is expected of me’)
Soft Skills for Public Managers
44  The Eleven Time Thieves
Dr. Donald E. Wetmore ( “Time Thieves: The 11 Biggest Time-wasters Revealed”) lists out
the eleven ‘inconsiderate troupe’ of eleven thieves that gang up to steal some of the precious
time away from productive use of managers.
1. Poor Planning:  Failure to see the value of planning and getting impatient to get
something done are the causes of poor planning. Absence of a plan of action is likely to
trigger off a false start, resulting in unproductive time utilization on the critical path of the
task being undertaken. Consequently, the managers might not find enough time forcompleting the task.
2. Crisis Management:  Most often, crisis management is an offspring of lack of
prioritization of tasks.  As a result of the inability to distinguish between the urgent, the
important and the unnecessary tasks, unimportant tasks are likely to get done first at thecost of important tasks. Consequently, the managers are not likely to find enough time to
get around to the important things.
3. Procrastination:  It is easy to put off tasks if they are not due right away.  The trouble is,
tasks pile up and can force managers to run into a time crunch later. Procrastination is
generally triggered off by the fear of failure / success, perfectionism, wanting to do it all or
incorrect priorities. It is a virtue to want to do a good job. But some people become soanxious about getting a job done perfectly that they never complete it.  Managers should
examine whether their efforts to get the job done perfectly are really improving things or
preventing them from getting the job done.
4. Interruptions:  Interruptions and distractions arise due to lack of planning, poor
concentration and lack of control over environment. They are unnecessary thieves of amanager’s time and come in many forms – drop-in visitors, telephones, e-mails
unscheduled meetings, poor communications and confused chain of authority etc. Managers
should be less willing to automatically give away their time just because they demand it.They should learn to avoid distractions if they are to get work done. They should work in
areas where they are less likely to be disturbed and tell people when they are busy and
cannot be disturbed.
Handbook on Time Management Skills
55. Not Delegating : Wanting-to-do-all by oneself is yet another thief that could let the
managers lose control. They feel that employees can never do anything as well as theycan. They fear that something will go wrong if someone else takes over a job. They lack
time for long-range planning because they are bogged down in day-to-day operations.
6. Unnecessary Meetings:  If a meeting is held without a specific agenda and nothing
productive comes out of it, clearly that meeting was unnecessary. Obviously, such meetings
are thieves as the time is wasted and things just do not get started.
7. The “shuffling blues”:  Managers often waste much time because of disorganization.
Keeping things that they need in a specific place, eliminating clutter, making sure that theyhave all the materials or information that they need before starting on the task and following
a day-planner or schedule will help keep the ‘shuffling blues’ away at the work place.
8. Poor Physical Setup:  Not having the things that the managers need frequently within
easy reach and having a lot of the things that they seldom require close-by results in wastage
of a lot of time, wearing out the carpet, retrieving what they frequently need. And of course,
as they pass others they will often pull them aside to steal some of their time.
9. Poor Networking:  Quality relationships with employees and others can be a substantial
time-saver as they open doors for the managers with all kinds of opportunities. Failing to
develop a good network base will cause them to waste time creating what they might have
had through their network.
10. Bad Attitude:  Nothing sinks a day more effectively than having a poor attitude. It
causes the managers to dwell on the problems and not the solutions and makes it possible
to throw the day away. When they are burdening others with their problems and complaintsthey are forfeiting their valuable time.
11. Negative People:  Being surrounded by negative people could mean the managers
are spending a lot of their time listening to them but getting nothing much or purposeful
from them.  Obviously, avoiding such people will help the managers to minimize wastedhours and get some of their productive time back.
Soft Skills for Public Managers
6How much time do your spend each day on the following time stealers?
• Watching TV
• Reading Newspapers / Magazines excessively
• Idle chat, gossip and telephonic talk• Opening and sorting mail
• Returning telephone calls
• Meetings• Paying bills
• Day-dreaming
• Fretting over personal problems• Caught in traffic snarls
• Planning how to change things
• Waiting for things to happen• Taking naps
• Eating snacks between meals
• Drinking• Smoking
• Shopping
• Wagering money
Handbook on Time Management Skills
75  Saboteur Time Styles
The other aspect is self-inflicted thieves – ‘saboteur time styles’ that steal time. Based
on the typical patterns of behaviour that tend to sabotage people’s attempts at effectivetime management, Susan Ward (“Are You Sabotaging Your Time Management Efforts”)
classifies managers into different personality types and prescribes the following simple
exercise, intended to help managers discover their standard behavioural responses
to events and provide them with some clues for effective time management.
The Firemen  - For them, every event is a crisis. They are always seen busy dousing
the fires. They find scarcely any time for anything else and do not spare a thought on
time-management. Tasks keep piling up around them, while they are seen rushing
from fire to fire all day.
The Over-Committers  – They just cannot say ‘No’ to anybody. They oblige and try to
please everybody. All that anyone has to do is just ask, and they will chair another
committee, take on another project, or organize yet another community event.
Consequently, none of the tasks receives complete attention and remains half-done.
The Aquarians  - There is such a thing as being too “laid-back” - especially when it
starts interfering with their ability to finish tasks or bother to return phone calls. Getting
to things that is when they get to them is not time management; it is simple task
avoidance.
The Chatty Kathys  - Born to socialize, they have astounding oral communication
skills and cannot resist exercising them at every opportunity. Every interaction becomesa long drawn out conversation - especially if there is an unpleasant task dawning that
they would like to put off.
The Perfectionists  – Exactitude is their watchword, and they feel that no rushed job
can be a good job. Finishing tasks to satisfaction is such a problem; they need more
time zones, not just more time.
Soft Skills for Public Managers
8Price of Time Inefficiency
What is the price of inefficient time management for an organization? That is a crucial
question managers should ask and promptly address. Statistics show that a person -on the average - loses at least one hour of productivity each day due to disorganization
and inefficiency.  Accordingly calculated, the aggregate monetary value of loss caused
by inefficient time management by all the employees in an organization amounts to:
·1 hour  X  one person’s hourly salary = Rs. ____________
·6 days a week X ____________ Rs. lost today = Rs. lost this week.
·48 weeks X Rs lost this week + _________  ____ Rs. lost this year.
·Number of persons X __ Rs. lost this year = Rs (total) __________
The Six D’s
“When’s the last day you didn’t have a high-priority phone call, an urgent email or a
stressed-out colleague begging for attention?” asks Tom Gegax, founder of GegaxManagement Systems and author of the best –seller “By the Seat of Your Pants:
The No-Nonsense Business Management Guide.  “
He says: “Getting pulled off-course is in every leader’s job description. That’s why
enlightened managers must have a strategy for dealing with daily interruptions.”Gegax bases his time-management principles on the “Six D’s” - don’t do it, delay
it, deflect it, delegate it, do it imperfectly  and do it.
“When something pops up, rather than robotically just doing it, I start with the first
option,” Gegax says. “If that doesn’t apply, I move on to the second. I keep cruisingdown the list until I reach the appropriate action.”
For instance, many seemingly urgent tasks disappear if you don’t do them or delay
them, he says, leaving you more time and energy to focus on the tasks that matter.
And while some contingencies need immediate attention, your involvement isn’t
always required. Carefully consider whether to deflect the situation to anotherdepartment or delegate it to a subordinate, Gegax advises.
Handbook on Time Management Skills
9If you do opt to tackle the problem yourself, Gegax cautions against automatically
shifting into “perfectionist mode.”
“A large number of my projects could hardly be described as perfect, yet were
successful nevertheless,” he says.
Of course, reserve the final “D” — do it — for the tasks you’ve determined will keep
you moving toward your goals.
(Matt Krumrie - Time Management for Managers)
An easy way to find out how effectively or ineffectively managers spend their time is touse the Time Inventory Chart . At the end of each day they should write down the time
spent on each of their activities. The total amount of time for all activities should equalthe total number of hours they were awake.
TIME INVENTORY CHART
Hours unaccounted for = _____________Activity  Mon    Tues     Wed     Thur    Fri Sat Sun     Total
Sleep
Hours Awake
Work: Office &
HomeCommuting &
Travel
EatingDressing &
Personal
Hygiene
Family &
Personal
Work
Education &
Self-Improvement
Community &
Professional
Activities
Leisure