14. USING THE SWISS CHEESE METHOD 
WHILE A CAREFULLY THOUGHT-OUT plan with well-defined 
goals and priorities is a giant step toward getting control of 
your time (and your life), even good planners often manage 
to forget one detail: A plan, like any tool, is valuable only if 
it's used. The best plans remain daydreams until you bring 
them to life through action. 
^n the case of most routine tasks—such as eating or brush­
ing your teeth—planning leads directly to action. Even when 
you tackle more complex activities, planning and doing may 
be so closely tied together that they seem parts of the same 
step. A good plan—a plan that in all ways feels right to 
you—has a way of getting you to act on it simply because it's 
in front of you. After you finish such a plan, it draws you 
right into starting on the high-priority items. 
At other times this transition from planning to action goes 
less smoothly. Let's assume that as a result of your planning 
(Listing/Setting Priorities, answering Lakein's Question) 
you've zeroed in on a particular task as your A-l: Today 
you're going to wash all the windows in the house! But in­
stead of acting on your plan, you hesitate. Perhaps you feel 
like turning to a less-important task, or quitting for the day 
to go to a movie or merely to draw doodles in the dirt on the 
windows. Your attitude toward doing the A-l is "do it later" 
rather than "do it now." Perhaps, for reasons I've discussed 
earlier (see Chapter 10), you'll settle on doing a C-task. 
Fve talked with thousands of people about their efforts to 
gain control of their time and their lives. Again and again I 
hear the familiar refrain, "For years I've been wanting to do 
this, but I keep putting it off," or "I know just what to do 
but I can't find time to get started." 
Procrastination! It's one of the major stumbling blocks ev­
erybody faces in trying to achieve both short-term and 
100 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 101 
long-term goals. But rather than let procrastination seize con­
trol of you, how about doing something positive? 
Have Yon Picked the Correct A-l? 
When you've identified an A-l but find yourself reluctant 
to "do it now," take a fresh look at your choice. Your reluc­
tance may be based on an intuitive feeling that the A-l is not, 
after all, the best use of your time. Your intuition is often 
right. Avoiding the A-l may be a smarter decision than your 
selection of the A^l in the first place. Suppose your A-l is 
learning how to sail, but you find that the instructor charges 
more than you can afford. Not following through on your 
plan may be the wisest course. 
Perhaps your choice of an A-l was the right one at the 
time, but now your priorities have suddenly and unexpectedly 
shifted. You have to forego spring housecleaning this week 
because Aunt Mary from Boston arrives on your doorstep 
three days early for her annual visit. Or you sit down at your 
desk to pay some bills when the mailman delivers a letter 
from your bank saying your last check bounced. Obviously, 
your A-l is to straighten out your messed-up checking ac­
count; paying the bills will have to wait. 
Putting off work on an A-l is also wise when you find it 
will lead to consequences you didn't foresee when you sat 
down to plan. An advertising executive had decided that the 
best use of his time would be to respond to a big manufac­
turer's request for a preliminary presentation of an advertis­
ing campaign that might bring the advertising man a lot of 
additional business. He was disturbed because he had failed 
to follow through on this request for several weeks. 
After brooding about this failure, he finally realized what 
was holding him back. Although this was an account he had 
long wanted, he knew that if he landed it, he would spend 
the next several months designing a huge campaign from 
scratch. But he already felt terribly overworked as it was. No 
wonder he was reluctant to tackle his A-l! 
Once the advertising executive realized this, he knew that 
his problem was not procrastination but a matter of priori­
ties. His real A-l should have been to do something to ease 
(rather than add to) his work pressures, so he spent the next 
102 ALAN LAKE IN 
week training a subordinate to take over some of his routine 
work. Only then did he go back to thinking about the new 
account. He started in immediately, and, no longer held back 
by his former reluctance, he created a stunning proposal 
that landed the account. 
So if you don't follow through on a plan because the 
choice is not current or valid, your delay is not due to pro­
crastination, but to a~desire to be flexible and adaptable. 
You're right not to go forward with your first A-l. The best 
course is to downgrade the former A-l. Pick out a new A-l 
that better fits your changed priorities or unexpected oppor­
tunities, and make sure you "do it now." 
Procrastination is . . • 
Procrastination is when you've come up with a good A-l 
activity, validated your choice, and found at least some min­
utes you could have spent on that A-l, and you are still not 
with it. Instead, you are doing a lesser A, a B, a C, or maybe 
even a task that you should admit is not worth doing at ah. 
What in the world is wrong with you? 
Mostly, you're just being human. And like most of my 
clients you undoubtedly procrastinate most on "Overwhelm­
ing A-ls" and "Unpleasant A-ls." People put off doing an 
Overwhelming A-l because it seems too complex or too 
time-consuming (such as washing all the windows, redecorat­
ing the house, cataloging the slides of your last six years' va­
cations, mastering Russian, preparing your tax return when 
you claim a lot of deductions, moving to a new house, selling 
your business to retire, planning a trip around the world). 
An Unpleasant A-l, on the other hand, is manageable, all 
right, but you're eager to avoid it because of some odious as­
sociation, which is usually emotional (disciplining an em­
ployee, admitting an awkward mistake to your boss, telling 
your boss he made a mistake, presenting your husband with 
the bill for a very expensive dress). 
These two categories are not mutually exclusive. Anybody 
can think of activities that seem both overwhelming and un-
the strategies for dealing with each are different. The next 
several chapters will be devoted to a discussion of how to 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 103 
handle the problem of procrastination on an Overwhelming 
A-l. After that I will turn to ways to stop procrastinating on 
the Unpleasant A-l. 
CAUTION: All the techniques to stop procrastinating are to 
be used only when genuinely necessary. It would be a great 
waste of your time to keep working with these techniques 
rather than doing your A-l. The goal, as ever, is to select 
your A-l and do it now. The techniques are simply means to 
an end and that end is to make better use of your time. 
How to Overwhelm the Overwhelming A-l 
Suppose you're at home and have just finished some 
chores. Your son will return from school in half an hour. 
You'd like to start on a painting you've been thinking about 
for weeks, but you wash up a few dirty dishes and mop the 
kitchen floor instead. After all, how can you possibly accom­
plish anything on your painting when you know you'll be in­
terrupted so soon? 
Or suppose you're at work and you've just finished a phone 
call. As you put down the receiver, you think to yourself that 
the best use of your time right now—the A-l—is to start 
work on the time-consuming, complex task of preparing the 
annual budget for your department. You glance at your 
watch. It's ten minutes before you usually go to lunch. A 
stack of routine paperwork is sitting on one corner of your 
desk, awaiting your attention. What should you do? Get a 
couple of quick paperwork Cs out of the way? Or put ten 
minutes into the A-l-task, even though you feel quite over­
whelmed by the prospect? Or go to lunch early? 
The best answer—which is to get started on that Over­
whelming A-l even with only a few minutes at your dis­
posal—seem unrealistic, even meaningless. You may well 
decide to get a few easy C's out of the way instead. On the 
face of it, this does not seem to be a very serious breach of 
good time-management practices, except that a person's day is 
typically divided up into bits and pieces. Let's face it: Large 
blocks of uninterrupted time are a comparative rarity. If 
again and again—a few minutes before lunch or before your 
child returns from school—you choose to work on the easy C 
104 ALAN LAKEIN 
rather than to begin the difficult A-l, then you are procras­
tinating; you're avoiding what is really important. 
In most cases, when a person turns to the short and easy 
C, he does so precisely because it is short and easy. What you 
need is some way to make the Overwhelming A-l competi­
tive with the easy C. 
But how? Let's say you have estimated that it'll take you 
fifty hours to formulate the budget, and you have only those 
ten minutes available before lunch. The fact that you cannot 
find anything like fifty hours today may well cause you to put 
off starting the project until tomorrow. But of course there 
aren't fifty hours available the next day either, so you may 
delay day after day until, with the deadline looming, you fi­
nally make a frantic effort to get the job done—and probably 
none too well, because you're in such a rush. 
The key to getting an Overwhelming A-l under control is 
to get started on it as soon as you've identified it as the A-l 
task. And an excellent way to get moving is to turn such an 
Overwhelming A-l into "Swiss Cheese" by poking some holes 
in it. I call these holes "instant tasks." 
An instant task requires five minutes or less of your time 
and makes some sort of hole in your Overwhelming A-l. So 
in ten minutes before lunch you have time for two instant 
tasks. To find out what the first two should be, (1) make a 
list of possible instant tasks, and (2) set priorities. 
Here are some Swiss Cheese moves toward tackling the 
budget problem: getting a copy of last year's budget, decid­
ing on the people you'll need to contact, obtaining the files 
you'll need, arranging a meeting to discuss the budget, or 
going to lunch with a subordinate and turning over part of 
the task (or all the preliminaries) to him. The only rule for 
making up your list of possible instant tasks is to limit it to 
items that can be started quickly and easily and are in some 
way connected with working on the Overwhelming A-l. 
What Five Minutes Can Do 
The underlying assumption of the Swiss Cheese approach is 
that it is indeed possible to get something started in five min­
utes or less. And once you've started, you've given yourself 
the opportunity to keep going. For example, you may be­
come so interested in reading one of the files that you study 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 105 
it for forty-five minutes before realizing how hungry you are. 
Swiss Cheese may well become your lunch—non-fattening 
but eminently satisfying. 
It's just as likely that you will start somewhere only to find 
that it quickly leads to a dead end. You try to call someone 
to arrange a meeting on the budget for after lunch. He's not 
available until tomorrow. So now you feel satisfied that 
you've done your bit on that project for the day. You may 
even be glad to have failed in your first effort; it's such a 
convenient excuse for further procrastination! That's an un­
promising start Swiss Cheese is supposed to lead to involve­
ment. 
So if that first effort failed, be patient for another moment. 
Think of a new instant task and give it a try. 
Don't try to bite the same hole out of the cheese twice. If 
you've tried an instant task and it didn't lead to involvement, 
the next step is to try another instant task right away. And 
remember: One hole does not make a piece of Swiss Cheese. 
It may take a number of instant tasks before you finally get 
involved with the big A-l and gather the momentum needed 
to stay with it 
One nice thing about the Swiss Cheese method is that it 
doesn't really matter what instant task you select as long as 
it's (1) easy—the easier the better—and (2) related to the 
Overwhelming A-l. How much of a contribution a particular 
instant task will make to getting your A-l done is far less im­
portant than the overriding objective of the moment: To do 
something—anything—on the A-l. Whatever you choose, 
you'll at least have begun. 
The Swiss Cheese approach sometimes makes it possible to 
achieve surprising inroads even on a complex project. After 
you've made ten or twelve holes in an Overwhelming A-l, 
you may discover with delight that the task turns out to be 
much less difficult than you'd expected. Perhaps you've found 
a way to turn over much of the project to someone else. Or 
you've discovered an unsuspected short cut Or the job turns 
out to be easy and fun. Maybe all that was required was to 
break up the task into manageable bites; after you've done 
this some jobs, like some jigsaw puzzles, are easily completed. 
106 ALAN LAKE IN 
Make A Last-Ditch Try 
If you can't bring yourself to tackle the A-l, perhaps you 
should compromise. Suppose you've managed so far today to 
escape from the A-l. Before you go on to other things, make 
one last-ditch try at getting involved. Look at your watch and 
note the time. Spend exactly five minutes on the A-l and 
then stop for the day. Surely you can stand almost any task 
for five minutes I 
Picture yourself on your summer vacation by the lake. 
You've been lingering on the shore imagining how cold the 
water must be. You ask some people standing at the water's 
edge, and they tell you that it's really cold. They've gone in, 
though, and seem to have enjoyed it You'd like to try it, too, 
but you're leery of the cold water. 
Finally, you walk to the end of the dock and put your big 
toe into the water—it feels cold, all right. You put your 
whole foot in—it feels colder. You sit down and painfully put 
both feet into the water—it's colder still. You let your knees 
relax, and the water comes up to your calves—it's painfully 
cold. 
This bit-by-bit torture is getting you down, so you tell 
yourself youll quit in five minutes. You stand up. Should you 
jump or dive in? You decide to jump in, swim the fifty feet 
to the float, swim back, and—if you aren't enjoying it by 
then—climb out, dry yourself off, and play Ping-Pong. 
There doesn't seem to be any right time to jump in. You 
decide to count down from one hundred. One hundred, 
ninety-nine, ninety-eight, . . . each number comes slower than 
the one before it. Four, three, two, one, jump! You're in the 
water and swimming toward the float. 
Go Ahead: Quit If You Must 
An hour later you may still be in the water—if you de­
cided you liked the exuberance of swimming and playing in 
the chilly water. If you quit after five minutes you'll be wait­
ing your turn for a rematch with the Ping-Pong king. 
Back home the following week, you might wonder 
whether you can use this "quit in five minutes" guarantee to 
start exercising. Your doctor said you need more exercise. 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 107 
You've already bought the exercise manual, but the exercises 
look too awful for words. Each morning during the two 
weeks before your vacation you got out of bed and groaned, 
"No, not today. Maybe tomorrow." 
You're tired of groaning and would like to be in better 
shape. You decide that surely you can take five minutes of 
exercise. You get the kitchen timer and set it for five min­
utes. You open the manual and begin the exercises, keeping 
one eye on the clock. As soon as it rings, you're saved by the 
bell from further exertion and you groan in relief. You 
haven't given up groaning, but at least you've begun your ex­
ercise regime. Maybe the same trick will work again tomor­
row. Maybe you might gradually increase the time to six, 
seven, or possibly eight minutes. 
Back at work you find that you can use this "quit in five 
minutes" teaser to get yourself involved. You realize that you 
are delaying the A-l project because you fear the worst, but 
once you get into it things will not be as awful as you imag­
ine them to be (isn't that often the case?). So you spend five 
minutes and do a little experimenting. You dip gingerly into 
some aspect of the A-l. 
What did you learn? Was the A-l as unpleasant as you 
imagined? Was it dull? Was it really all that overwhelming? 
Was it that difficult? Will it take that many hours? Isn't there 
any hope of success? 
You can't expect to get too good an answer to all these 
questions in just five minutes. And if you happen to forget 
about them as your interest in the A-l increases, it really 
doesn't matter. If this effort did not get you off and running 
on the A-l, at least you know a little more than you did be­
fore. Maybe your subconscious will help you come up with a 
fresh approach to the A-l tomorrow. And don't try to tell 
yourself that you would have spent all Wednesday afternoon 
working on the A-l if you hadn't spent five minutes today 
and discovered how unpleasant it is! You know deep down 
inside that the first five minutes Wednesday would have been 
your quota for the day. Now you can spend your second five 
minutes on it Wednesday—or perhaps the whole afternoon. 
At other times you'll find, even after ten or twenty instant 
tasks, that you still have a complex and time-consuming proj­
ect ahead of you. You are unlikely to finish a twelve-hour 
job by working only in five-minute bites. You'll have to set 
108 ALAN LAKEIN 
aside large blocks of time, hours or days, to complete it I 
suggest you take your calendar and lay out a schedule of an 
hour a day, except for three hours each Tuesday and Thurs­
day afternoon (or whatever) until the twelve hours have 
been reserved. Then let the logic of the task itself dictate 
steps to keep it moving. 
The instant tasks may not have gotten the project finished, 
but they have led you to explore various aspects of it. You 
have become involved in an interesting question here, a chal­
lenging problem there. The project begins to exert a stronger 
and stronger pull. You become more eager to get back to it. 
You've zeroed in on your target You're involved; you no 
longer need the crutch of instant tasks. You have stopped 
procrastinating. You're doing the A-11 
The method, I think you'll agree, sounds good. On the fol­
lowing pages I'll describe a wide range of instant tasks— 
quick, easy ways to get started—that will not only aid in 
eliminating procrastination, but will help break up any large 
task into smaller, more do-able activities. 
15. HOW TO FIND INSTANT TASKS 
FOR INSTANT INVOLVEMENT 
Do More Detailed Planning 
So YOU'RE HAVING TROUBLE getting involved in the A-l. 
Are you sure you've really drawn a bead on exactly what it is 
you want to accomplish? If that's your trouble, you probably 
need to do more detailed planning. As a general rule, the 
more detailed the plan, the better the chance that action will 
follow. And remember: Planning is really decision-making. 
First, I'm going to show you how to make some decisions 
to solidify your feelings about the A-l. 
Take a piece of paper and head it "I have decided." You 
are now ready for five minutes of Decision Time. 
Record on the paper whatever decisions come to your 
mind about the A-l. For instance: when to start it; what to 
do first; what to do next; how much time you can devote to 
it all together; what information you need; what equipment is 
required; who else will be involved. The more concrete deci­
sions you can make, the more likely it is you'll fix on some 
simple but valuable ways to start on the A-l and get in­
volved. 
If you run into snags doing this kind of detailed planning, I 
recommend you try "The Magic If." 
Admit to yourself: "I just cannot plan." Then say to your­
self, "But if I could plan, what would the plan be?" Now, set 
about to answer the if question. The beauty of the "I can't 
. . . but if I could . . . question is that it temporarily frees you 
from all the limitations and problems you face. It unblocks 
the planning muscles, as many of my clients have discovered. 
Or imagine this: You've been relieved of all responsibility 
for getting a difficult A-l done. Instead, you only have to 
write down a plan for someone else to follow. You're simply 
to give this person whatever good advice you can, based on 
your familiarity with the project up to now. Once you've 
109 
110 ALAN LAKEIN 
Get More Information 
Sometimes I just can't get started on a project no matter 
how hard I try. I once decided to lay a patio in my 
backyard. But I knew nothing about the materials or tools I 
was going to need. I never did start working on my patio. 
This is a common chain, and a deadly one. You don't have 
the information. You don't get really interested. You can't 
become involved. No action. 
The old adage about familiarity breeding contempt is often 
untrue. Non-familiarity often leads to lack of interest. I once 
read of an experiment with high school students who were 
presented with a list of forty-eight questions about inverte­
brate animals. The students were asked to indicate the twelve 
questions to which they would most like to know the answers. 
Surprise! Questions about familiar animals were picked more 
often than questions about unfamiliar animals. 
In another study, students were shown some unusual ob­
jects borrowed from museums. The experimenter went 
through the collection of objects three times, giving more in-prepared your plan, the entire burden of carrying out the 
plan will be shifted to his shoulders. You never have to do 
anything. Your only task is to plan how someone else should 
do it. 
Now, what would you recommend to this person? Don't 
worry if some of the steps you recommend might be difficult 
for you. The other fellow will be the one to do them—that is 
what he's there for. 
Next, put the written plan in the center of your desk and 
take a break. Go to the water cooler. Talk with a friend. 
Relax. When you return to your desk, look at the written 
plan the other person is going to follow and see if there is 
anything you might do to help him out. You will probably 
find there are steps within the plan involving work that you're 
particularly good at or that you enjoy doing. Until the other 
fellow shows up, how about getting going on these preferred 
parts of the plan, just to start the A-l rolling? 
It's a fact: not only can The Magic If make it possible for 
you to plan what is to be done, it will often enable you to 
follow through as well. 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LTFE 111 
formation each time around. Whenever an object was present­
ed, the students were asked to indicate on a l-to-5 scale the 
extent to which they wanted to know more about it. There 
was a significant tendency for more curiosity to be expressed 
with each successive appearance of an object 
Here is experimental evidence that it takes at least a little 
information to generate an interest in something. The same is 
true in our everyday experience. Listener surveys of radio 
and TV news programs show that people who listen to the 
six-o'clock news often listen to the 11 o'clock news as well. 
The same people who listen to the news regularly are likely 
to read one or two newspapers seriously. Some information 
leads to eagerness for more. 
Who reads hobby magazines? People who already know 
something about the hobby. Whether it's model railroading, 
skiing, or gardening, most readers of such publications are 
regular readers eager for new ideas. Someone just glancing at 
such magazines on a newsstand may well wonder how anyone 
could find them interesting. Lacking background knowledge 
and a frame of reference, they find the details meaningless. 
Not until a certain level of familiarity with a subject is 
reached are people likely to push toward a further explora­
tion to satisfy the newly aroused curiosity. Once that level is 
reached, there is a good chance that involvement will in­
crease as knowledge accumulates—which is why getting more 
information is an instant task that leads to involvement. 
Reading is one of the easiest instant tasks for most people. 
Looking at books, magazines, newspapers, internal reports, 
memoirs, files, or letters for even a few minutes may stimu­
late your interest in a subject that you never much cared 
about before—and it's leisurely activity that requires little en­
ergy. 
Another good way to get more information is to talk to 
people. People in your organization. In your neighborhood. 
In your family. Talking is a pleasant way to get more in­
formation about your A-l. 
112 ALAN LAKEIN 
Try a Leading Task 
When you really aren't quite up to doing anything on your 
A-,1, but are not averse to getting ready to do something, 
taking a physical step can often be a way of easing yourself 
gradually into the big job. I call this a "leading task" because 
it leads you on. 
An obvious instant task to get you started on writing a re­
port is to make some notes on the points to be covered. But 
suppose even this seems too much to tackle. Try sharpening a 
pencil. I'm not joking! Involvement will not necessarily ensue, 
but at least there is a chance that, once you have the freshly 
sharpened pencil in your hand, you will let the pencil impel 
you to write a few words of value before you put it down 
again. 
The physical presence of some item associated with your 
A-l can also be a compelling stimulus leading to involve­
ment. A good leading task is to move such an item to a con­
spicuous place. You have a letter that you know you should 
answer, but have been avoiding. Try putting it right in the 
middle of your desk. This increases the chance that sooner or 
later you will pick it up and get started on a reply, perhaps 
when you are seeking diversion from some other task. An­
other good leading task is to remove all distractions from 
your desktop (such as expense accounts, cocktail-party invita­
tions, or that copy of Playboy). Your chances that you will 
turn to the A-l will materially increase if it's the only item 
staring you in the face. 
If you really want to read War and Peace, but just don't 
seem to get around to it, here are some good leading tasks. 
Buy a copy. Take it off your bookshelf. Put it in your favor­
ite reading chair. Leave it lying around opened to page 1. 
Show it to a friend and say, "I've finally started on this!" 
People often tell me about some hobby they once enjoyed 
but now only dream about. One man told me how much he 
regretted that he hadn't played tennis in five years. I learned 
that his tennis racket was at the bottom of a storage chest, 
and that the only tennis balls he owned were old and had no 
bounce. No wonder playing tennis was just a dream for himl 
Doing a leading task would certainly increase this man's 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 113 
chances of once again enjoying a game of tennis. He might 
have his racket restrung. Or buy some new tennis balls. Or 
put all his equipment in the trunk of his car. If he still found 
himself driving past an empty tennis court without stopping, 
he could put his racket on the front seat so that he had to 
move it to get into his car. With this constant stimulus—or 
irritant—as a reminder, if he's really serious about wanting 
to play tennis, hell eventually take his racket out of his car, 
and even hit a few balls. Whether hell remain involved is an­
other matter—which we shall turn to later. In any case, he 
will have gotten started and at least given himself the chance 
to continue. 
One of my clients decided to wake up a little earlier each 
morning to find time for a new interest. Setting his alarm 
ahead half an hour did no good because he went right back 
to sleep. I suggested he try a leading task. He moved the 
alarm clock from beside his bed to the other side of his 
room, right in front of the bathroom door. Getting up to 
turn off the alarm put him very close to the bathroom, so it 
required only a bit more effort to go to the sink and brush 
his teeth. Having brushed his teeth, he was free to go back to 
sleep. He found, however, that if he could just manage to 
brush his teeth, he was up to stay, because for years and 
years he had made it a practice never to go back to bed after 
brushing his teeth! 
Many of the most effective leading tasks take only a mo­
ment or two. We all know that there is often a very definite 
connection between clenching one's jaw and being deter­
mined; between leaning forward in a chair and being alert; be­
tween taking a deep breath and relaxing. When you act to 
place yourself within these patterns you can lead yourself on 
in the direction you want to go. Many of us do mis without 
even thinking about it. If you look directly at a speaker, 
you're more likely to listen to him. If you stand up and 
stretch during an evening's reading, you are less likely to fall 
asleep. Consciously look for opportunities to use these kinds 
of physical actions to help you do what you want, and you'll 
find them. 
Still another useful leading task is to "select the right chan­
nel." That is: If you have nothing to say, at least turn your 
mind toward the outlet that you'd use if you were full of 
ideas. If you must type something, turn on the typewriter. 
114 ALAN LAKEIN 
Title a page something like "I can't think of anything to 
type." Then pour out your soul to the typewriter—type any­
thing that goes through your mind, anything at all. After 
doing this for a while, your mind may be jogged so you're 
ready to put a fresh piece of paper in the typewriter and 
start typing something connected with the A-l. 
If you need to dictate, turn on your dictation machine and 
keep it on even if you don't have anything to say. Gradually, 
the running dictation belt may start to pull you along, almost 
forcing you to find something to say. Once the words have 
begun to flow, you can direct them toward the A-l. If you 
do not turn on your dictation machine until you have pre­
cisely the "right thing" to say, you may never get started. 
If you are having trouble making an important telephone 
call, pick up the phone and call a friend. Try to explain to 
your friend that it's impossible for you to pick up the 
phone, dial the numbers, say hello, and talk to this other per­
son. But wait! You've just done it. If you can do it once, you 
can do it again and make that A-l call. 
Leading yourself toward the A-l in this way will not al­
ways work. But I have observed many times that a simple 
physical action does indeed lead to meaningful involvement 
Take Advantage of Your Current Mood 
One reason why people have difficulty getting involved in 
their A-l is that it often requires doing something they're not 
emotionally prepared to do. Perhaps getting started on your 
A-l means sitting quietly at your desk thinking, when what 
you really feel like doing is talking to someone. Now you 
have two options: To forget all about your decision to get 
started on the A-l and talk to someone just for the sake of 
talking, or to take advantage of your mood by letting it carry 
you toward the A-l, rather than away from it 
The idea is to take your emotional need and see whether it 
is possible to satisfy it in some way connected with the A-l. 
In the example I just gave, clearly the best use of your time 
would be to go to talk to someone who is concerned with 
your A-l and see what ideas he or she can share with you. 
After satisfying your need for companionship, and hopefully 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LD7B 115 
getting some good ideas in the bargain, you may find it much 
easier to return to your desk and do the required thinking. 
The reverse twist of this—leading to procrastination rather 
than forward movement—happens daily in most stock-
brokerage offices. Many people become stockbrokers in part 
because of a wish to associate with (and help) other people. 
Rationally, this could be satisfied by calling on prospects and 
customers and attempting to sell stocks. This need can also 
be satisfied by talking to other stockbrokers. Besides, stock­
brokers are handier, and known for their friendliness; pros­
pects are more difficult to reach, and occasionally of less 
friendly bent 
That is why many stockbrokers use up much valuable time 
by selling other brokers on their views about sports, politics 
and women. 
At times everybody likes to be left alone to shuffle papers 
quietly. This is a legitimate emotional need, often satisfied by 
processing routine paperwork, emptying the in-box, or neat-
ening a pile of more or less useless memos. If you detect that 
you're avoiding your A-l because of this need, you may be 
able to satisfy it and still do something for the A-l. You 
could arrange all your papers connected with the A-l in al­
phabetical order, dot all the i's and cross all the t's, make neat 
lists of things to do on the A-l (without any feeling of ever 
having to do them), or rewrite a memo about the A-l even 
though the memo really needs no further polishing. 
You might well ask me at this point, "Aren't I better off 
doing something worthwhile that is not connected with the 
A-l rather than doing something trivial on the A-l?" 
My emphatic answer to this question is "Nol" 
If you tell me you've been procrastinating and are not able 
to get involved in the A-l, do anything, regardless of impor­
tance, so long as it has some connection with the A-l. Once 
you're involved, your sense of priorities will lead you eventu­
ally to do more productive work on the A-l. But if you turn 
to some other activity, you've done nothing to try to halt the 
procrastination mechanism, and you've given yourself no 
chance to become involved. 
Sometimes it's best to wait until your mood is right for 
doing something. You don't want to use up too much energy 
trying to force yourself to do something that you don't want 
to do. But often—especially if the task you have identified as 
116 ALAN LAKEIN 
your A-l is fairly complex and involves a number of steps— 
there is an excellent chance that at least one particular aspect 
of the project will fit your current mood. Your job is to find 
that soft spot 
A good question to ask yourself at this point is "What am 
I willing to do on the A-l?" You might say to yourself, "I 
know there are plenty of things about this A-l that I don't 
feel like doing now, but is there anything I find interesting, or 
appealing, or at least tolerable?" 
Find some piece of the A-l that you're in the mood to do. 
Then you will be using your existing needs to lead you 
toward the A-l rather than letting them lead you away from 
it. 
Say you're writing a book. At this moment you're not in­
terested in rewriting any of the dozen chapters that will have 
to be completely reworked. You do feel like reading the edi­
tor's comments on those chapters that are in pretty good 
shape, and that require little effort on your part to finish up. 
Or you face a big exam. You're not quite ready to read 
the supplementary textbooks that the professor has assigned. 
But you don't mind reading over your class notes, something 
you know you're going to have to do anyway in the course of 
preparing for the test 
Give Yourself a Pep Talk 
Perhaps your lack of involvement is due to a lack of mo­
tivation. In that case, taking a few minutes to build up mo­
tivation is a good investment. 
Studies have shown that most people don't start a project 
they believe they can't finish. Conversely, most people will at­
tempt something that appears easy even though in fact it is 
impossible. The basis of their willingness to try is their sub­
jective estimate of the probability of success. 
So remember: If you feel that something will be difficult 
or impossible, the odds are that you'll not be as likely to try 
it as if you feel it is easy. But keep in mind that these are 
your feelings. They aren't necessarily facts. Since you don't 
for a fact know how hard something is, you'll do better to as­
sume that it's not too difficult and that you can do it. This is 
much more likely to get you started on the A-l. It stands to 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LD7E 117 
reason: If you think you're going to be successful, you'll 
work harder on getting the A-l finished—which is why a lit­
tle pep talk about positive attitude and self-confidence can 
motivate you to do the A-l. lust as the coach talks to the 
football team at halftime, you might try telling yourself: 
"You can do it. So stay with it" 
"Stop feeling sorry for yourself and get to workP 
"You'll never know until you try." 
"We don't want any defeatists around here." 
These slogans will help fight discouragement and negative 
feelings. 
Your pep talk might also include a listing of the benefits 
(see Learn to Stress the Benefits, Chapter 20) that you'll 
reap from getting the A-l done, and yes, the consequences 
that face you if you fail to do it now. (See The Real Price 
Of Delay, Chapter 19). 
Make a Commitment to Someone 
You tell yourself, "I'll spend an hour on this in the after­
noon," but the time comes and goes and you work on other 
matters. But if you have actually made an appointment with 
someone else to discuss the subject, you're likely to keep the 
appointment and get the subject discussed, because you've 
made a commitment to someone and don't want to let that 
person down. I find that some clients use an appointment 
with me as the stimulus to get going on some A-l they feel is 
important. They don't want to let me down, and they don't 
want to waste the fee they're paying me. They've made a 
commitment in self-esteem and money, and these are power­
ful stimuli indeed. 
What can you promise, and who is a good promisee? Well, 
you can promise your husband to get the garden in shape in 
time for the backyard barbeque he has arranged; promise 
your wife, as she leaves for the office in the morning, that 
you'll make a souffl6 for dinner tonight; promise your boss 
that you'll have the proposal ready for his review on his return 
from his Toledo trip. Usually this kind of promise activates 
your conscience sufficiently to get the A-l done. 
A deadline, though often unpleasant, also seems to force 
action. A promise to meet a deadline rather than do it "later" 
118 ALAN LAKEIN 
is a good inducement If friends invite you to "get together 
sometime" you may well want to leave things deliberately 
vague. But if you really enjoy their company, don't let them 
get away without setting a definite time for getting together. 
A meeting is a special kind of deadline. A commitment to 
be a particular place at a specific time to discuss a particular 
subject goes a long way to get a task moving. Your un­
willingness to be totally unprepared at the meeting forces 
your hand. You do some preparation, and this represents 
more involvement than you've mustered up to now. 
Meetings are one of the greatest time-wasters ever invent­
ed. They are almost always inefficient. Much of what is said 
at meetings is irrelevant or redundant. Little is to the point. 
But what do you expect? If the guy who called the meeting 
knew all the answers, or could just go ahead and do what 
needed doing, he wouldn't have called the meeting in the first 
place. 
Most meetings come about because someone cannot do the 
A-l easily or by himself. Rather than leaving important prob­
lems totally unattended to, the executive committee of the 
Supergiant Corporation of the membership committee of the 
YMCA gets everyone together and at least gets someone 
thinking about the A-l problem. It might be an instant task to 
call a meeting, but it's hardly an instant task to attend it As 
I've shown, you can usually do a lot better yourself. 
16. TRY STIMULUS CHANGE TO 
KEEP INVOLVED 
ONCE YOU GET INVOLVED, many tasks keep you involved 
until the end. You may put off cleaning up after a dinner 
party for several hours, but once you do begin—washing the 
dishes, cleaning the ashtrays, vacuuming the rug—you perse­
vere until the job is done. Or, having put aside a couple of 
hours of quiet time, you^spread across your desk all the ho­
tel, airline, and rent-a-car receipts from a long business trip 
and keep at it until you have filled out all the necessary ex­
pense account forms so your office will reimburse you. 
Most tasks are sufficiently short or compelling so that even 
if you must put them aside and come back to them later, 
your initial involvement carries you quickly back to the heart 
of the project, just as a good book pulls at you again and 
again until you have read the last page. 
At other times you work on a task for a while, but you 
run out of steam short of your goal. Perhaps you've been sit­
ting at your desk working on the proposal for a new televi­
sion documentary for an hour and a half, and can't come up 
with another decent idea. Or you've been addressing enve­
lopes for a charity benefit; you have to finish by 5 P.M. but 
halfway through you just can't stand to look at another zip 
code. 
You know that the best use of your time is to continue with 
the A-l. You have told yourself that this is no time for pro­
crastination. You managed to get involved. You built up 
quite a bit of momentum. But now you're bogged down. 
How you can possibly stay involved any longer? 
One answer is: Always set a next step. Quite frequently, a 
project will bog down for lack of planning the very next step. 
Whenever you are working your way through a project, 
make clear what the next step is. Then set a time to check 
whether you've completed that step. 
119 
120 ALAN LAKE IN 
No Need to Become Bored 
It's not at all surprising that you should become bored, 
restless, or fatigued after working on the same task for some 
time. The yearning for change is natural. Variety is not 
merely "the spice of life"; it's an essential ingredient. 
Various experiments have been carried out in which an in­
dividual is placed in a room with a strictly controlled envi­
ronment. His responses are monitored. In one of these exper­
iments the subject lies on a comfortable bed in total darkness 
most of the time. All his physical needs are cared for. He 
pushes a button and finds a hot meal behind a sliding panel. 
After five days of this, most of the test subjects reported 
hysteria, fantasies, and delusions. No subject was able to 
continue for more than a week, and all took many months to 
recuperate fully. Such experiments confirm that in the ab­
sence of what is called "stimulus change" a person undergoes 
rapid psychological deterioration. 
If stimulus change is a fundamental human need, this need 
may go back to the way our ancestors lived. The caveman's 
life depended on his ability to detect and respond to change. 
A shift in the scent carried on the wind alerted him to the 
presence of food and the danger of predatory animals. Sur­
vival of the fittest favored those who were most sensitive to 
stimulus change. Modern man has inherited this biological ra­
dar. 
But if it once was a matter of life and death to be aware 
of a sound of the advancing mammoth's footsteps, today it is 
generally annoying and distracting to be turned into the noise 
of strangers walking down the hall, other people's telephones 
ringing, and cars passing by. 
Potentially distracting stimuli are always around although 
when you're very much engrossed in something, you may not 
notice them or can ignore them. Constructive stimuli some­
times need an invitation. 
Normally your need for stimulus change is satisfied by the 
evolution of the current task as one step leads to another. 
The natural evolution of a project generates many possible 
tasks. Keeping a To Do List gives you a choice of tasks to 
provide stimulus change. It even pays occasionally to take 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 121 
time to list additional steps you might take on the A-l just so 
you have a broader range of activities to draw upon. 
It's when the current task does not provide variety and 
change of pace that you grow restless or bored and eagerly 
accept distraction or create it for yourself. Is there any alter­
native to procrastination at this point? 
Suppressing your need for change is very unlikely to be a 
satisfactory way of staying involved in the A-l when you feel 
like you've had enough; you can't change the biologically in­
stilled need for stimulus change. If you're going to get con­
trol of your actions, your opportunity comes in providing the 
right stimulus change. 
Rest Breaks and Work Breaks 
One thing you can do is take a rest break. Get up and 
stretch, walk to the water cooler, socialize, then continue on 
the A-l for another hour or two. 
You can also take a work break. Any other task will do, 
but another A is always preferable if it will mean a change 
of pace from the work you were just involved in. If you've 
been addressing envelopes, make an appointment with your 
hairdresser, go over your dinner menu, wash the breakfast 
dishes, or visit with the woman next door. Then, after a few 
minutes, go back and continue the A-l. 
Often the break is all you need. But what do you do if 
you're working against a deadline and every minute counts? 
Or if you tried a coffee break ten minutes ago and you're al­
ready becoming restive again? You might leave the A-l for a 
while, but is that wise? Won't you have the same problem of 
reinvolvement when you try to return to it later? 
You really want to stick to it, but how? 
The answer lies in satisfying your need for stimulus change 
within the scope of the A-l. 
Tasks that you find dull and repetitive can—with some 
imagination—be made more interesting. Even if you're send­
ing out Christmas cards, sewing name tapes on camp clothes, 
or coding inventory sheets, if you look you will find ways 
to vary such tasks and satisfy your need for stimulus change 
without running away to some other activity. 
The real payoff in using this technique comes when you're 
122 ALAN LAKE IN 
having trouble staying involved in a multifaeeted project, ,like 
writing a magazine article, developing a study proposal for 
the League of Women Voters, figuring out how to respond to 
a competitor's new product, or researching ways to recycle 
used plasterboard. To keep from procrastinating when you 
get bogged down in a swampy part of the forest, you need to 
get hooked on some new aspect of the project. You need 
fresh bait for fresh involvement. 
As I showed in the section on instant tasks, there are many 
ways to move your project ahead. You can plan, talk to oth­
ers, give yourself a pep talk, gather information, write down 
some notes. Naturally, some projects have more built-in vari­
ety than others. But there are always at least some opportu­
nities for change within each project. 
Try changing your location. Sometimes new surroundings 
can do wonders to refresh a tired mind. If you've been work­
ing at your desk, try the conference room. If you've been 
reading in the living room, try the bedroom. Or stay where 
you are but change your position. If you have been sitting 
down, try standing on your head. 
What works best is to change the way you're going about 
the task. Any intellectual effort contains elements that can be 
juggled. You need information and ideas. These have to be 
collected, digested, and acted upon. You can shift back and 
forth between working on information and ideas, or switch 
from collecting to digesting to action. 
Not Enough Information—or Too Mnch? 
Let's begin with information collection. Earlier I discussed 
the idea of getting more information as a way to get in­
volved. You will recall that the level of your interest gener­
ally increases as you move from no information to some 
information. So when you need to keep involved in a project, 
pick an area where you have little or no information and in­
crease your- knowledge. 
But suppose your problem is the very opposite. Many 
people get bogged down in the middle of a project because 
they have so much information that they feel overwhelmed. 
Or they have too many ideas (even too many good ones). 
There is an optimum level of knowledge of course (it varies 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LD7E 123 
for different projects and for different people). Either too 
much or too little leads to a decrease in interest and involve­
ment. 
So if you are tired of collecting information or ideas, proc­
ess what you have. Consider each item; then file it, condense 
it, throw it out, organize it A particularly helpful step, if 
you've been gathering knowledge from books or other people 
or your own head, is to write something down. Even if it is 
no good for final use, it gives you something fresh to react 
to, or to show others to get their reactions. 
The Cushion That Never Got Made 
Ms. Gill had long wanted to make a needlepoint cushion 
for a favorite chair. She kept putting it off, because there 
seemed to be so many details to work out before she could 
even begin to think of putting needle to canvas. Finally, 
wisely realizing she would have to start somewhere if she was 
going to get on with it, she went shopping for materials. She 
spent several weeks looking for the perfect pattern and yarns. 
A saleslady at one store talked her into taking a month-long 
intensive course on the history and technology of needlepoint. 
Having completed the course, she decided that the only way 
to have yarns of the precise colors she wanted was to get 
them from a mail-order house. This led to a six-week delay 
while she inquired about samples, received some, asked for 
more, received those, and finally made her choice. 
Then, having assembled her materials, she realized she did 
not have the right place to work on her needlepoint project. 
So she decided to fix up the spare room, change the lighting 
fixtures, clean out the accumulation of old junk, etc. Another 
month went by. Then she asked her husband to make her a 
special box for her supplies, since she did not like any of the 
types she saw in the stores. Another two-week delay. When 
at long last she had taken care of every conceivable detail, 
eliminated all risk of error or inconvenience, and laid every­
thing out in great orderliness, she had become so sick of the 
whole thing that she thought she had best delay a while be­
fore starting. 
The moral of the story is: You can become so carried 
away with preparatory steps that you beat any project to 
death. I said before that any task is acceptable as a stimulus 
124 ALAN LAKE IN 
change so long as it bears some relation to the Overwhelming 
A-l. But it must also be relatively short and easy. It must 
lead you toward the completion of the A-l. If Ms. Gill's A-l 
was to turn loose her curiosity about needlepoint and follow 
wherever it led, then she accomplished her A-l in fine style. 
But if it was to make a new cushion for her chair, then she 
certainly went astray. 
Any major project, such as adding a new wing to your 
house, or introducing an important new procedure in your 
office, is a prolonged effort that requires continuing involve­
ment at many stages. This takes large blocks of time. 
First schedule the time needed to work on the project: 
Then when the time comes use the ideas in this chapter to 
keep involved. 
17. SOMETIMES IT PAYS TO SLOW DOWN 
IN SOME SITUATIONS, such techniques as instant tasks and 
stimulus change will not halt procrastination, because you 
harbor a too-active dislike or distaste for the A-l. Talking to 
your child's teacher about a bad grade, seeing the doctor for 
an annual checkup, asking the bank for a loan, drawing up a 
new will, going for a job interview—these are all examples of 
important but unpleasant tasks that many people put off. You 
probably include them when you plan, and underscore their 
importance by assigning them an A-priority. But when the 
time comes to follow through, the task looms up larger than 
life in all its unpleasantness, and you hastily turn to some 
other activity instead. 
A decision to turn from an unpleasant A-l to a more 
pleasant task gets far less time and rational consideration 
than it deserves. Typically, such a decision is made quickly, 
often in a matter of a few seconds. 
Suppose you take out a letter you should answer now. 
Writing a reply is your A-l, but since it involves admitting an 
embarrassing mistake you find the task distasteful. You lay 
the letter aside for the third time this week and pick up a 
magazine instead. Soon you're absorbed in an interesting arti­
cle, and have forgotten all about the unpleasant letter. The 
sequence of steps that led to your procrastinating on the A-l 
took no more than fifteen seconds. 
Let's back up and look at that decision more closely. You 
already had a clearly identified A-l. The next step was to do 
it But you hesitated. In essence, you had two choices at this 
point. You could. 
(1) do the A-l, thereby making the best use of your time; 
(2) do something else, thereby wasting your time. 
True, you got some value out of the activity you turned to 
instead of the A-l, but since the A-l was the best use of your 
time, the other activity was a comparative waste of time. 
125 
126 ALAN LAKEIN 
What can you do when you have no doubt that you should 
do the unpleasant A-l, yet are strongly inclined to run away 
from it and turn to something else? 
First, you must recognize clearly when you have reached 
such a pivotal point You're at Decision Time when you're at 
the point of choosing whether to do the A-l now or to avoid 
it. It is somewhat like being at the top of a mountain. There 
are two paths leading down the mountain, one to the north 
and one to the south. Once you take a few steps you will be 
on your way down one side of the mountain. But for the mo­
ment you are poised at the top, uncommitted. 
Once you realize you're at Decision Time, you'll want to 
take control of the decisionmaking process. The way to do 
this is to slow down the final decision. A quick decision to 
put the unpleasant A-l out of sight and mind gives you little 
chance to curb your tendency to procrastinate. Take enough 
time to consider the situation carefully. Give yourself every 
opportunity not to ditch the A-l for some activity of lesser 
value. Slow down the process so that you have time to make 
a conscious and deliberate choice. 
Take the case of the unanswered letter. When you catch 
yourself putting the letter aside, slow your hand down. If you 
take a full minute to put the letter away, instead of the sec­
ond or two you would normally take, you'll be forced to con­
front your thoughts about the letter. You'll have enough time 
to review why you've been putting the letter aside, and try to 
come up with a better way to solve your dilemma than by 
procrastination. 
Have you ever done anything you didn't like? Of course 
you have. Everyone has. In childhood your parents insisted 
that you go to bed at 7:30 P.M., even though it was summer 
vacation and the older kids were still outside playing Hide-
and-Seek. On April 15 you mailed your income-tax check to 
Uncle Sam, even though you would rather have used the 
money to buy a four-track stereo for the den. You studied 
for an exam coming up in a subject you loathe. The list is 
endless. 
Even as you do something you don't like, you have a 
choice. You can do it grudgingly or, having decided to do it 
now, you can do it cheerfully. Why make yourself miser­
able? Once you've decided to do a task, you may as well do 
the best you can and try to enjoy yourself. 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LD7E 127 
If you sense you're about to avoid the A-l and do some­
thing else instead, tell yourself quite emphatically that you're 
at Decision Time. Remind yourself what an important time it 
is. Caution yourself to slow down. Now use these three ways 
to help you overcome your distaste for the A-l: 
(1) Deal with the unpleasantness directly. 
(2) Recognize the greater unpleasantness that results from 
delay. 
(3) Create enthusiasm that counterbalances the unpleas­
antness. 
I'll deal with each of these in detail. Once you have all 
three in your toolkit, you can use whichever seems most ap­
propriate to give you the extra push you need at Decision 
Time for doing the A-l now. 
18. DON'T LET FEAR GET IN YOUR WAY 
How MANY, TIMES have you avoided doing something im­
portant because you were afraid of making a mistake? Or 
getting angry? Or feeling guilty? Or hurting yourself or oth­
ers? Or being rejected? Or taking on too much responsibility? 
Or confronting the unknown? Lots of times, I'm sure. 
I'm not a psychiatrist, so it would be presumptuous of me 
to make any diagnosis, especially at long distance, of any­
one's particular emotional hang-up. The techniques I discuss 
in mis chapter work in a bypass fashion; they are not intend­
ed to cure anyone of any particular emotional problem, but 
to allow him to function while he either works his problem 
out himself or gets professional help. 
m deal primarily with fear, because my conversations with 
psychiatrists and psychologists have convinced me that fear is 
at the root of all avoidance. If you can conquer your fear, 
you can do that unpleasant A-l. 
I have encountered many cases of people avoiding a task 
to which they have assigned a high priority because subcon­
sciously they feared the consequences that would follow once 
the task was completed. 
The sales executive mentioned earlier kept procrastinating 
on his A-l of trying to sell a new account because of his fear 
of adding further to his workload if he were successful. His 
fear needed to be allayed by clearing away some of bis other 
work; only then did he stop avoiding his high-priority A and 
go after that big account 
A supervisor was asked to develop a procedure manual for 
a job that he had always personally directed. His boss made 
it very clear that the manual had a higher priority than any­
thing else. Again and again the supervisor put the task at the 
head of his To Do List yet he did nothing about working on 
the manual. Finally he realized he was procrastinating out of 
fear that if he finished the procedure manual, he might even-
128 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 129 
tually be out of a job. He would no longer be indispensable. 
His real A-l was a talk with his boss to clarify what his 
status would be once the job on the manual was done. 
Don't let your emotions do you in. If you suspect you are 
avoiding the A-l because of some fear, then at Decision Time 
ask yourself, "What am I afraid of?" Make a list of possibili­
ties and single out the fear that is most likely causing the 
avoidance. Then confront that fear head on. How? Take the 
case of Mr. Blue. 
Mr. Blue was a sales representative for an industrial-prod­
ucts firm. He knew that the best use of his time was to 
develop contacts with as many new purchasing agents as pos­
sible. Nevertheless, he always stretched out his visits to those 
agents who were old friends, even though many of them 
could repay him only in talk and not in profit. He avoided 
making calls on new agents, because they occasionally reject­
ed him or treated him rudely. 
Now Mr. Blue had prepared an annual sales plan. It 
rightly emphasized new agent contacts, but from the very 
first day he tried to implement the plan, he found himself 
running away. His fear of feeling rejected was clearly pre­
venting him from following through on his wonderful plan. 
Determined to find some solution to his dilemma, Mr. Blue 
decided to focus on one particular goal—to see the purchas­
ing agent from the Ajax Company. He'd long wanted to go 
after the Ajax account The chance of actually closing this 
sale was truly exciting. But he was scared that the agent 
might turn him down with some devastating comment and 
then he would be worse off than before. 
How to Extinguish Fear 
As he contemplated the telephone call to the Ajax agent 
and felt fear holding him back, Mr. Blue told himself that 
being afraid was silly; that there was nothing to worry about; 
that he had more important things to do than worrying. In 
effect he said to his fear, "Go away, you're bothering me." 
This had often helped him over the hump he confronted be­
fore making a call to a new agent but since he had particu­
larly strong feelings about this agent his pep talk was not a 
sufficient antidote. 
130 ALAN LAKEIN 
If Mr. Blue's fear had been at a low-enough level—of 
campfire rather than forest fire proportions—then it could 
probably have been easily extinguished. But with an out-of-
control fear, a really threatening emotion, such a solution 
rarely works. Indeed Mr. Blue's current predicament was 
such that when he told himself, "There's nothing to fear," it 
only made matters worse. Not only was he afraid; he was 
afraid that he was afraid when he shouldn't be afraid! He 
certainly had to find some other way of handling his fear of 
being rejected by the Ajax agent. 
How to Contain Fear 
A small fire can easily be put out with a little water, but if 
a fire is raging uncontrollably, it's best to contain it, to create 
boundaries and then in effect say to the fire, "You can burn 
all you want inside this circle, but you may not cross this 
line!" 
Mr. Blue found that although he could not extinguish his 
fear, he was able to contain it, at least for the moment. He 
realized that he might not even get to talk to the feared 
agent, but only to his secretary. Anyway, he thought he'd be 
able to survive a quick, clean "No" over the telephone. If he 
did succeed in making an appointment, there would be plenty 
to worry about, so he would give himself lots of time to in­
dulge his fears—but only after he made the call. 
At this point Mr. Blue recalled the character Major Major 
in the novel Catch-22, who announced that he was not to be 
disturbed when he was in, and that visitors were to be shown 
into his office only when he was out. Mr. Blue wasted a few 
more seconds daydreaming about how nice it would be if 
new agents were never in when he called. Then he came back 
to reality, hoped that the man would not be in, and dialed 
the number. 
It turned out that the Ajax agent was in, and could see 
Mr. Blue the following Monday at 2:30 P.M., four days away. 
At first the exhilaration that came from actually having 
gotten the appointment kept Mr. Blue busy all afternoon, lin­
ing up other appointments with new agents. 
But the next morning, when he should have been collecting 
data and assembling material for the Ajax presentation, Mr. 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LD7E 131 
Blue found himself procrastinating once more. He kept turn­
ing to other, far less important matters, and in between he 
fretted about the grueling questions the agent would ask. As 
his fear of failure gathered momentum, he envisioned himself 
appearing foolish and ill-prepared. When he could stand his 
painful imaginings no longer, he escaped to the coffee ma­
chine down the hall. 
How to *. Judo" Your Fear 
At this point Mr. Blue could neither extinguish his fear nor 
contain it; he had to face the situation head on. As he re­
turned to his desk he recalled another strategy he could re­
sort to—using judo to throw his fear. The idea behind judo, 
he knew, is to use your opponent's own strength and weight 
against him, thereby turning potential defeat into victory. 
Mr. Blue's fear was coming at him with great force and ef­
fect. He would have to throw that fear by using its force to 
his advantage, rather than letting it do him in. 
As he sat down at his desk his inner dialogue went some­
thing like this: 
FEAR: "I am going to make a fool of myself. I really don't 
know much about the Ajax Company or how they can best 
use my products ..." 
JUDO: "... if thafs the case, then I better put some time 
into finding out more about Ajax right away." 
FEAR: "Then there are all those questions I know hell 
ask..." 
JUDO: m. . . and instead of worrying about being ill-
prepared, I had better try to anticipate his questions and dig 
up the answers right now." 
With his energy more positively channeled, Mr. Blue 
gulped down the last of his coffee and started to research the 
Ajax account. Everytime something unpleasant about the up­
coming interview occurred to him, he "judoed" it. When he 
thought of a terrible mistake he might make, he made a 
mental note not to let that happen. His fear actually spurred 
him on, since he realized that only conscientious work might 
save him. There was no procrastinating the rest of Friday; he 
wanted to be sure he was prepared. 
Monday afternoon, on the way over to the Ajax Company, 
132 ALAN LAKE IN 
he started worrying again. By the time he entered the build­
ing he was shaking all over. All his efforts on Friday would 
be wasted if his fear kept him from being able to think 
straight 
Ballooning Your Fears 
At this point Mr. Blue's fear could not be dealt with by 
any of the strategies I have discussed so far. After all, this 
was it! If ever there was a good time to be afraid, it was 
now. Mr. Blue realized that his only chance was to give in to 
his fears completely and hope that they would burn them­
selves out before it was too late. 
As he got into the elevator, he asked himself, "What's the 
worst thing that could possibly happen to me as a result of 
this visit?" Perhaps the agent would call his boss and tell him 
that Mr. Blue was incompetent. Perhaps he would tell all his 
friends Mr. Blue was an idiot and they should never do busi­
ness with him. 
Getting warmed up, Mr. Blue began to balloon his fears 
even more. His fantasies were easily the equal of Walter 
Mitty's. Perhaps the agent would organize a boycott of Mr. 
Blue's products. Perhaps the agent would start a smear cam­
paign against him and he would be spurned everywhere by 
everyone. With no safe territory left, Mr. Blue pictured that 
he would withdraw to a storage closet and starve to death, 
uncared for, completely and finally rejected. 
Mr. Blue got off the elevator, walked slowly down the 
corridor, and was outside the agent's door when he realized 
that his fears had carried him into complete absurdity. The 
balloon burst. The situation could not possibly be as terrible 
as he had imagined. Having envisioned himself at the point 
of death, he had nowhere to go but up. With a last nervous 
shake, he opened the door. 
In fact nothing terrible happened. The agent was in, wel­
comed Mr. Blue warmly, thanked him for coming over, and 
inquired why Mr. Blue had not come in to see him sooner. 
He listened attentively as Mr. Blue delivered his well-
prepared presentation, said he was certainly interested and 
then and there gave him a small order as a starter. Mr. Blue 
left his office and breathed a great sigh of relief. 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 133 
In time, partly because of the confidence that comes from 
successes, but also because he survived the occasional inevi­
table rejections intact, he began to look forward to encoun­
ters with new agents as a way of testing himself and reaffirm­
ing his inner strength. He gradually came to disassociate his 
sense of worth as a person from the role he played as a sales­
man. The agents who turned him down were not rejecting 
him, they were rejecting his product. This change in attitude 
did not happen right away; in fact, it took Mr. Blue two 
years to reduce his fear of rejection to an occasional twinge. 
I should point out that Mr. Blue has behaved as all good 
examples in books behave—he has managed to exhibit a 
number of problems in dealing with fear, and he has bene­
fited from all the techniques I suggested using. 
I wouldn't expert you to do as well the very first time you 
try to conquer fears you've built up over the years. But the 
next time you suspect that some fear is causing you to pro­
crastinate on a A-l, try extinguishing, containing, judoing, 
and ballooning that fear until it is afraid to show itself ever 
again.