19. THE REAL PRICE OF DELAY 
WHEN YOU'RE AT DECISION TIME and suspect you're about 
to procrastinate on an unpleasant A-l, taking a moment to 
contemplate the consequences of delay can often get you 
back on the track. Let me tell you about a woman who hated 
to write thank-you notes. 
Anne Davis receives a birthday gift from out of town. She 
tells herself that she must take a few minutes right away and 
drop Aunt Mary a note. A few lines will do: "I got the 
sweater. It looks beautiful and is just my size. Thank you so 
very much." 
But Ms. Davis, being something of a perfectionist, really 
doesn't want to settle for such an insipid note—she'd like to 
write something with more verve. After alL she doesn't want 
Aunt Mary to think that her four years of college were a to­
tal waste 1 She doesn't feel up to being eloquent at the mo­
ment (and, of course, she has a hundred other things to do), 
so she puts off thanking Aunt Mary for now. 
Two weeks pass before she faces up to the fact that she 
still has not written to Aunt Mary. By this time, she figures, 
Aunt Mary is getting somewhat impatient. Well, she'll make 
up for the delay by sending off a charming two-page letter 
telling her all about how often she wears the sweater, how 
well it goes with several of her skirts, how comfortable it is, 
and how many compliments she has received from friends. 
She doesn't have time to write such a long letter now . . . but 
she tells herself she'll be sure to get around to it very soon. 
Two more weeks go by, and now Ms. Davis is feeling very 
angry with herself. She is so ashamed, and so afraid of what 
Aunt Mary must think of her. Surely she'll tell everyone in 
the family what a lazy, ungrateful niece she has! Ms. Davis 
will have to think up some pretty good excuses. "Everytime I 
sit down to write you, the phone rings," or "This has been 
the busiest month of my life" will perhaps do the trick. 
134 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 135 
Hopefully, if she fills her letter with enough personal anec­
dotes about her hectic life, Aunt Mary will forgive her. 
How the Problem Escalates 
At this point, writing the thank-you note has become very 
important and very unpleasant. It's not surprising that Ms. 
Davis hates writing thank-you notes! She starts worrying 
about the letter whenever she has an odd moment. She con­
structs the note in her head while taking a shower and while 
taking out the garbage, but this doesn't bring her any closer 
to getting the letter written. 
Ms. Davis starts feeling terribly guilty—so guilty, in fact, 
the thought of the letter makes her sick. In order to avoid 
this, she now blocks out of her mind any thought of the un­
written note. 
Finally one day the unwritten note comes back to haunt 
her, and Ms. Davis acknowledges to herself that it is Deci­
sion Time. Should she: (1) write a ten-page letter bringing 
Aunt Mary up-to-date on life with the Davis family for the 
last two years, and off-handedly sneak in a thank-you for the 
sweater? (2) wait another nine months and if Aunt Mary 
sends another birthday present (hopefully she won't!) thank 
her for both presents at the same time? (3) pretend she 
never received the sweater? (4) wait until she goes back 
home for a visit, and then impress Aunt Mary with how she 
remembered the sweater after all these years and was waiting 
to thank her in person? (5) telephone Aunt Mary long-dis­
tance and after a half an hour of chit-chat (at considerable 
cost) to soften her up, thank her? or (6) give up any hope of 
ever being able to face Aunt Mary again because how can 
she ever explain why she couldn't find five minutes to write 
a quick note the week the sweater arrived? 
What Is the Price of Delay? 
Ms. Davis's delay in thanking Aunt Mary cost her many 
minutes of anguish. She would have suffered less had she 
slowed down and made a deliberate effort to recall the conse­
quences of her past delays: Her Aunt had felt slighted before 
136 ALAN LAKEIN 
and her own mother had written an admonishing letter about 
it. She knew from prior experience how each week of pro­
crastination in writing a thank-you note escalated both the 
size of the task and the discomfort level. How much better to 
write the note now than to endure such suffering again. 
Before you consider delaying in such situations, slow down. 
Take a minute or two to consider the consequences that will 
follow. 
Acknowledge that if past experience and present resolve 
are any indication, this is not something that will go away. 
You are going to do this task eventually. The question is not 
"Will I do it?" but "When?" Ask yourself, "Since I am going 
to do it eventually, do I really want to pay the price of de­
lay?" 
What is this price you'll have to pay? While it's different in 
various situations, the following guidelines are generally true. 
For one thing, if a task is not something that will go away, 
the actual work required may increase as time passes (as 
with the thank-you note). Also, it will keep haunting you un­
til you do it. Here are some other situations where procras­
tination creates trouble and extra work. You can: 
put off filing your paperwork so long that every time you 
need a piece of paper you have to hunt through a huge "to 
be filed" stack, 
delay changing your car's motor oil until you need a $375 
engine repair two months after the manufacturer's guarantee 
expires, 
put off sweeping crumbs from the back of the pantry so 
that you come home one day to find your crumbs gone and 
thousands of ants in their place, 
delay action of replacing the unreliable widget section until 
suddenly you are swamped with customer complaints and 
must spend more time answering complaints than fixing the 
widget section would ever have taken—and you still have to 
fix the widget section. 
Even when the task seems to remain identical whether you 
do it now or later, its impact on you can be substantially dif­
ferent 
Suppose you feel so tense and nervous about asking your 
boss for a raise that you put it off until tomorrow. Tomor­
row, when you think about it again, you feel every bit aa 
anxious, if not more so. And every time you think about it 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 137 
you not only remind yourself what a nasty scene you may 
provoke by your request, but you summon up all the emo­
tions associated with this nastiness. In other words, every 
time you think about the task and put it off, you suffer some 
of the same pain as if you had actually done it 
You still don't know whether you'll get a raise, so you'll 
have to think about it further and again suffer pain. More­
over, there is a tendency for your anxiety to increase each 
time you think about it. Does it make sense to put off doing 
something because you feel tense and nervous about it—and 
then feel tense and nervous anyway? 
Next time you're tempted to procrastinate on an unpleas­
ant A-l, slow down. Why suffer all the pain associated with 
thinking about it and get none of the benefits? You've sur­
vived every nasty situation you've faced. Sometimes—be hon­
est now—didn't you worry unnecessarily? Didn't some of 
those experiences turn out to be tolerable and even occasion­
ally pleasant? And even when there was real discomfort 
didn't it often stop quicker than you had imagined? 
Consider the Risks 
Can you really afford to risk delaying a large, important 
project until the last minute? Suppose you aren't feeling well 
when the last minute comes? Or you face an unexpectedly 
large number of unavoidable interruptions? Or another crisis 
comes up that must be dealt with immediately? Or the proj­
ect turns out to require more hours than you had originally 
estimated? When you delay a project until close to the dead­
line there is always the risk that you'll run short of time and 
have to submit inadequate work or miss the deadline. 
The college student who assesses the risk of delay has to 
decide whether his term paper is an A, B, or C priority. The 
student who is more interested in dates, sports, politics or 
recreational reading might well give the term paper a C-prior-
ity until the last minute, but he pays the price when his pro­
fessor gives the paper only a C-grade. 
Many people say, "I deliberately put things off until the 
last minute because I know I work best under pressure. If I 
wait until the deadline is really close, I'm more effective. I 
138 ALAN LAKEIN 
waste less time, I get better ideas. I don't lose by delay; I 
gain!** 
If you've made a clear-headed assessment of your work 
habits and are convinced that such is the case, I say, fine! 
Many people do work best under pressure. For others, too 
much pressure can be devastating. Whether you're a college 
student putting off a term paper until the last minute, a 
homemaker putting off packing valuable china and stemware 
for the move to the new house, or an executive putting off 
preparing your fall sales campaign, you must assess your own 
work habits and determine how you function best. 
Do you really work well under pressure? Consider the col­
lege student with his term-paper problem. There are a num­
ber of reasons why the quality of his work is not as likely to 
be as high as if he had more time. Valuable reference mate­
rial or interviews may be left out because of time pressures. 
Ideas that require investigation cannot be explored when 
there's no time to investigate. A last-minute effort means that 
accuracy may have to be dispensed with. No rewriting is pos­
sible and so the prose style will suffer. 
Ask yourself if you perhaps spend more time by delaying 
until the last minute? Working overtime on a crash program 
leads to physical and mental fatigue. Thinking becomes fuzzy. 
Hours may be lost solving a problem that a clear mind could 
penetrate in minutes. 
Emotions may eat up extra time, too. It takes time to 
worry about whether you're ever going to start the project; 
whether your work is going to be good enough; whether 
you're going to make the deadline. Do you feel anger at 
yourself for putting yourself in such a position? Regret at not 
being able to go to a show tonight? Disappointment that 
you're really not giving yourself a chance to show your abil­
ity to do good work under more favorable circumstances? 
The Drawbacks of Pressure 
The need to expedite routine parts of a project when every 
minute counts often forces you to do work yourself which 
could have been done by others had you budgeted your time 
better. You'll have.to do the typing, photocopying, collating, 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 139 
stapling, and other clerical work, because there's no secretary 
at 3 A.M. to help you. 
Besides, do you like working well under pressure? Or do 
you feel a slave to deadlines? Do you experience last-minute 
panic about whether or not you will finish an important proj­
ect on time? Do you wonder if there isn't some other way— 
a relaxed, in-control-of-the-situation approach? 
Do you find that you behave badly toward other people 
when you're under pressure? Do you make other people mis­
erable by your demands for priority of your work over 
theirs? Remember, people may not think your project is the 
most important 
If your backlog and new demands continually create pres­
sure without letup and you don't like it perhaps you're in the 
wrong job. But if the pressure is self-inflicted by your own 
perpetual procrastination, then maybe you can do something 
about it 
Do you work well only under pressure? Maybe you thrive 
on the feeling of exhilaration that comes from the total in­
volvement demanded in meeting a last-minute deadline. But 
what happens when the pressure is off? Do you find the time 
between deadlines woefully flat and stale? Puttering around, 
shuffling papers, doing trivia and giving the pressure a chance 
to build up isn't much fun. True, you can use the time be­
tween deadlines to goof off, recover from the last crisis, 
prepare yourself for the next crisis—which is all to the good. 
But if you feel you're fully alive only when under great pres­
sure, and feel let down in the in-between periods, then you 
may want to try some changes. Ideally, you want to be flex­
ible enough to make good use of your time whatever the situ-
ation. 
Here's a suggestion to help you avoid deadline mania: 
Don't wait quite so long before plunging in. Give yourself 
a little more lead time before the deadline. Try to start a 
little sooner, even though the pressure is not full-blown. As 
you learn to decrease the amount of pressure you need to 
work well, I think you'll find that you're increasing your 
willpower. You'll find you've gained a new sense of freedom 
and self-confidence. You'll feel more relaxed and in control 
of your time (and your life). 
20. LEARN TO STRESS THE BENEFITS 
TM NOW GOING to describe a technicrae called "Stress the 
Benefits" to help you muster enthusiasm at Decision Time for 
any unappetizing A-l. 
Consider Mr. O'Henry, who had an idea that he thought 
would save his organization several thousand dollars a year. 
Normally he would have submitted his idea immediately to 
his company's suggestion system. But this time he delayed 
submitting his proposal, because he knew that, if adopted, it 
might mean cutting back on the work assigned to one of his 
co-workers. 
The improvement Mr. O'Henry envisioned was tricky. 
There was a certain amount of risk involved. His supervisor 
had already given his opinion on the suggestion: "We tried 
that nine years ago. It didn't work then and it wont work 
now." 
The risk of failure, the possible resentment of his co­
worker, and the hassle with his supervisor had kept him from 
formally presenting his suggestion until now. Still, Mr. 
O'Henry was convinced that, everything considered, submit­
ting his proposal was the A-l. 
He managed finally to sell himself on submitting the pro­
posal by listing all the benefits he could expect. The benefits 
were of two types: (1) pluses that would start when the A-l 
was done and (2) minuses that would stop when the A-l was 
done. 
The pluses included the following: a cash bonus of 20 per­
cent of the first year's savings (at least $1,250), self-satisfac­
tion for a well done, and recognition from the management 
(leading to promotion, more interesting and enjoyable work, 
and a higher salary). 
The minuses that would stop when the A-l was done in­
cluded: worrying every night about whether to submit the 
suggestion form (worry could lead to ulcers, spending time in 
140 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 141 
hospital, using savings to pay hospital bills, etc.), avoiding his 
co-worker because of ambivalent feelings toward him, hating 
his supervisor for blocking his progress in the company. 
Once he started to Stress the Benefits, the A-l began to 
look so attractive that he was able to put possible drawbacks 
out of his mind, and go eagerly on with the suggestion form. 
How to Reward Yourself 
It's particularly valuable to Stress the Benefits as you plow 
through a long or complex job. Sometimes it's even necessary 
to exaggerate (balloon) the benefits in the middle of a hard 
A-l. 
If you've already considered all the benefits you'll reap 
from the A-l and still find yourself having a hard time ac­
complishing it, then you may have to try adding outside ben­
efits. The new benefits are like a rider to a Congressional bill 
that contains "sweeteners" to induce wavering Congressmen 
to vote for the bill. 
Suppose you have to go on a business trip. It's particularly 
unappealing to you. You may be able to make it more palat­
able by tacking a few days on the end of your trip to take 
your wife to that ski resort you've been thinking of visiting. 
You've gone beyond stressing the normal benefits (more 
money, possible promotion, etc.). You've added a "rider" to 
inspire you to do your A-l—take that very important busi­
ness trip. 
You can give yourself a reward for working on a task as a 
way to coax yourself along. Plan to work until eleven o'clock 
and then take a break to read the news magazine you've been 
waiting to look at—or sleep late the next morning. 
Give yourself a reward when you reach various milestones 
along the way of a larger project: when all the data for a 
survey comes; after you've interviewed six people to replace 
your assistant; after you've got a first draft of the plans for 
the new plant. If you work on the annual report today, 
you're entitled to go out for a drink after work. These are all 
ways of rewarding yourself. 
Rewards on final completion are important too. After I 
finish writing this book I'll take a vacation-
It also helps to relate an immediate reward to your Life-
142 ALAN LAKE IN 
time Goals. You can say, "Well, now, if I do this I'm going 
to keep my job, and I'm going to get promoted." Then you 
can build up the reward in your mind. If you have a good set 
of Lifetime Goals you can probably think of many more con­
nections between doing this A-l and achieving some Lifetime 
Goals. Again, you're Stressing the Benefits. 
Another way of keeping the value of the task in front of 
you is to give yourself a little taste in advance of what will 
happen if you do keep working on the A-l. Remember that 
vacation I have promised myself for when I finish my book? 
Well, long before I actually finish TU go down to our travel 
agent and make the airline, hotel, and car-rental reservations. 
Then I'll go back and keep on writing. I get further along on 
my A-l by Stressing the Benefits. 
Another way to get yourself to do unpleasant A-l's is to 
turn the whole task into a game. Let's say painting your liv­
ing room took you and your wife ten hours four years ago. 
Have you improved with age? See if you can shave some 
time off that ten hours. If you're a secretary with a particular 
report to be done every so often, see if you can type it 
flawlessly this time. Keep a little piece of paper noting how 
many errors you made last time and see if you can beat that 
. score. 
If it's a rather routine job, see how much of it you can 
knock off in fifteen minutes, or how nonchalant you can be 
while doing it. Anything that will help you get the task done 
is valuable. It helps you complete the task by varying the 
incentive, and even artificial incentives can help. Stress the 
Benefits and move closer to getting the A-l done. 
21. HOW TO GET BACK AFTER 
YOU'VE ESCAPED 
IN all my discussion of procrastination I've assumed that, 
once you've done a good job of planning, you're clear in your 
own mind about what your A-l is. You may go right ahead 
and do it or you may not. My clients have found that the 
techniques I've explained in the last several chapters will 
significantly increase the will to "do it now" and throttle 
down procrastination. 
But still, everyone procrastinates on occasion. So now I'd 
like to show you what is really happening when you don't do 
the A-l, when you deliberately or not-so-deliberately decide 
to put off the really important activity. 
If you're not doing the A-l, you're doing something else 
instead. This "something else," whatever its intrinsic value 
(which may be very high), is in part appealing because it is 
an Escape from doing or thinking about the A-l. 
Everyone has favorite Escapes. Escapes can be A's, B's, 
C's, or watching the girls go by. If you're at work, an Escape 
generally needs to be something that gives others the impres­
sion that you're busy and productive. In a private office or at 
home you have somewhat more leeway. You can even take a 
nap. 
Seven Common Mistakes 
Here is a run-down of some of the most common Escapes. 
As you read through them, ask yourself how many of these 
escape routes you use when running away from the A-l. 
Indulging yourself. Doing something you really enjoy. 
Buying a new hat or tie or book. Taking the rest of the day 
off to play golf. Getting a suntan. Going to the movies. 
Sleeping. Taking a bath or shower and leisurely grooming 
yourself. 
143 
144 ALAN LAKE IN 
Socializing. Visiting with others. Lingering on the tele­
phone. Renewing an acquaintance with an old friend. Making 
small talk every chance you get. 
Reading. Catching up on the backlog of unread periodicals 
stacked on the side table. Skimming through material previ­
ously relegated to a bottom drawer as not really worth read­
ing. Spending two hours on The Wall Street Journal, or 
trying to make a dent in your pile of unread copies of the 
Sunday New York Times or Book-of-the-Month Club selec­
tions. 
Doing it yourself. Baking your own bread. Spending an 
hour taking notes on a reference book rather than photo­
copying the three essential pages. Adding a long string of 
numbers by hand rather than walking over to the adding 
machine. Doing something that could be delegated. Spending 
your time solving other people's problems. Delving into as­
pects of the job that don't really concern you. 
Overdoing it. Supervising employees so closely that they 
can't get their work done. Keeping every visitor an extra fif­
teen minutes while you talk about your mimosa, butterfly col­
lection, arthritis, or lack of time. Being so diligent in giving 
your boss progress reports that you have little time to make 
progress. Rearranging your desk, inside and out, to be the 
very model of neatness and efficiency. 
Running away. If you're in headquarters, organizing a field 
trip. If in the field, going to headquarters. Expediting some­
thing that doesn't need it: hand-carrying a memo to another 
branch office; paying your telephone bill in person. Taking a 
long coffee break; extending your lunch hour; taking time for 
a cocktail or shopping. 
Daydreaming. Planning how you're going to spend your 
weekend. Worrying about all the things left undone at work. 
Wondering how you're going to spend the extra money from 
your hoped-for promotion. Recalling what a witty remark 
you made at a party yesterday. 
No doubt you can add to this list some of your own special 
favorites. Please remember, I'm not saying that there is any­
thing wrong with indulging yourself, reading, socializing, day­
dreaming. Quite the contrary; much of the fun in life comes 
from such things. Indeed, that is precisely why they are so 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LD7E 145 
appealing. The problem is you're trained to these escapes 
when you should be doing the A-l. 
Other Escapes are more subtle and less readily recognized 
as such. Perhaps you dabble around the periphery of the A-l, 
spending too much time on irrelevant details rather than 
going to the heart of the matter. Or as Ms. Gill did with her 
needlepoint project, you spend so much time getting ready to 
begin the A-l that you have no time left to do it. 
Finally, there are what might be called the Emotional Es­
capes: feeling guilty, getting angry, worrying. Indulging in 
such feelings is a very common way of escaping from the A-
1. To ask yourself whether perhaps you took the wrong job, 
married the wrong spouse, or bought the wrong house may 
well be useful. But if you wallow in such thoughts, ifs time 
to ask Lakein's Question. 
Admit When You're Wasting Time 
Some Escapes are undoubtedly worth doing and are excel­
lent uses of time: getting organized, making lists, improving 
morale, socializing, taking the day off, doing the A-2 or A-3, 
catching up on reading. Therefore, it is easy to tell yourself 
you're really making good use of your time, even though you 
are not doing the A-l. And perhaps you are. But you're not 
making the best use of your time. 
The best use of your time—as you've already decided—is 
to do the A-l. Anything else is a comparative waste of time. 
Consider one of my clients, a research scientist. He kept 
procrastinating on a difficult research study that had a very 
high priority. Despite his efforts to get involved and to con­
vince himself how important it was, he kept stalling. At my 
suggestion, he began to take a careful look at each Decision 
Time when he chose to avoid the A-l and turned to some­
thing else. 
At first, he felt like a helpless observer. It seemed as if the 
procrastination process was operating in spite of anything he 
could do. Rather than be discouraged at this point, he con­
soled himself with the knowledge that he was trying to under­
stand the dynamics of the process, which is the first step 
toward controlling it. 
After several days of closely watching his actions at Deci-
146 ALAN LAKEIN 
sion Time, he found certain patterns emerging. The thought 
of doing the A-l was always followed immediately by feel­
ings of inadequacy and tension. Most of the time he then 
quickly turned to making improvements on an old and famil­
iar research problem. He would talk to someone about some 
aspect of this other study, or rethink and rewrite portions 
that needed polishing. He felt completely on top of the situa­
tion. He was not doing the A-l, but he was doing something 
important and productive. 
In the back of his mind, however, was the nagging thought 
that he was rationalizing. He was not perfecting the old re­
port because it was essential (it was worth doing, but not 
now). He was doing it because it provided an easy Escape 
from the A-l. 
On my recommendation, every time he found himself 
working on the old project he repeated silently over and over 
to himself, *Tm wasting my time." During the next week or 
so he admitted to himself dozens of times "I'm wasting my 
time." 
At first, saying this didn't stop him from turning to an Es­
cape. Then the words began to make a difference. He ac­
knowledged that he really was wasting his time. The benefits 
he before associated with doing the Escape tasks had now 
lost much of their appeal. 
As he realized more and more that he was wasting his 
own time, the tide began to change. Instead of letting the 
procrastination process run him, he told himself that he 
didn't have to waste his time. lust as he had chosen to do Es­
capes, he could choose to do the A-l. It really was a black 
and white choice—Escape vs. the A-l. As he became able to 
see his problem in these terms he began to reject Escape 
and zeroed in on the A-l with increasing frequency. 
The real payoff came when, several months later, a new 
and even more difficult research study was offered to him. 
Having learned how his Escape mechanism worked, he was 
able to stop procrastinating and get involved in the new 
project almost immediately. 
Fve found that saying over and over *Tm wasting my 
time" works very well for women who choose ever-present 
routine household chores over some challenging project they 
have included in their Lifetime Goals Statement. If a woman 
really wants to play the piano, every time she dusts the piano 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 147 
she should admit to herself, "I am wasting my tune." If you 
use the "I'm wasting my time" warning signal, you will find it 
increasingly difficult to rationalize detours. Above all, you'll 
accept that it's you who is in control and makes the choices. 
Even when you achieve a high level of control, so that 
your chances of choosing the A-l at Decision Time are good, 
you won't always succeed. But if you can recognize when you 
are wasting your time, you'll definitely increase your chances 
further. 
How to Cut Off Your Escape Routes 
Another way to make sure you'll choose the A-l at Deci­
sion Time is to cut off all your Escape routes. The principle 
is simple and is often used by people who are trying to lose 
weight or stop smoking. If you keep all candy or cigarettes 
out of the house, you make it that much harder to give in 
to the craving for them. Every time you crave candy or a 
cigarette after dinner, you have to make a special trip to the 
store. Your reluctance to bundle up to go out in the cold 
may exceed your longing for candy or a cigarette. 
Should you perhaps cancel the subscription to the mediocre 
magazine you always turn to as an Escape from the A-l? If 
you can't bring yourself to that, how about hiding it in a 
drawer? At least then it won't have as much chance of dis­
tracting you as when it's sitting on your desk. 
If you're a housewife and your mornings are full of A's 
that never seem to get done, then tactfully avoid your cof­
fee-mate across the court. Sure, it's great fun talking to her 
but this delightful Escape prevents you from accomplishing 
the A-l. 
Perhaps your downfall is the two-martini lunch that ren­
ders you useless for the balance of the afternoon. If the most 
important thing you can do is have lunch and a few drinks 
while you regale an important client then by all means do it; 
it's your A-l. But if it's really an Escape from something im­
portant you have to do this afternoon, then it might be a 
good idea to think twice. As a compromise, why not go to 
lunch with a teetotaler? That way you can still enjoy lunch. 
You'll probably moderate your alcoholic intake, allowing you 
to go after that A-l this afternoon. 
148 ALAN LAKEIN 
If your Escape is going to the supermarket three times a 
week, make it a rule that you'll go only once. To make sure 
that you really won't need to go, do something concrete 
about those meal-planning, stocking and freezing ideas you've 
been contemplating for years. If you forget something or run 
out, try to make do. 
The Great Escape for nearly everybody is television. Lib­
erate yourself! Give your set away and then stalk your A-ll 
One final suggestion along these lines: You might want to 
give your secretary a list of your favorite Escapes. lust the 
fact that you know she has the list may prevent you from 
utilizing these dodges except in the most severe cases. 
Yon Can Procrastinate Positively 
It's just possible that you've tried all the suggestions Tve 
made about how to stop procrastinating—without success. 
O.K. If you have to procrastinate, I'm going to show you 
how to do it positively. 
Sit in a chair and do nothing. That's right—nothing. Don't 
read a book, don't shuffle papers, don't tackle your knitting, 
don't watch TV—just sit completely still. 
If you sit doing nothing for fifteen or twenty minutes 
(don't cheat—you must do absolutely nothing), you should 
become very uneasy. That A-l is staring you right in the 
face. And you're doing nothing. Precious minutes that you 
can use accomplishing a lifetime goal are slipping by. And 
you're sitting in a chair—doing nothing. Whenever I find my­
self procrastinating, this is the technique I use. Believe me, 
after ten minutes I'm off and running on my A-l, 
22. HOW TO DO BETTER NEXT TIME 
To get the most out of the suggestions and techniques I've 
described, a good deal of stick-to-itiveness or will-power is 
called for. You'll need willpower to: 
(1) plan when you're feeling harried and over­
whelmed; 
(2) keep yourself involved in a project even though 
some of the instant tasks you try lead to a dead 
end; 
(3) avoid your favorite Escapes when you have an 
important but unpleasant A-l to do; 
(4) maintain a positive attitude in spite of previous 
"failures"; 
(5) do something every day on your Lifetime Goals; 
(6) overcome fears, real or imagined; 
(7) resist doing a very easy (but unimportant) task 
that is right in front of you. 
Everyone knows that "Where there's a will, there's a way.** 
And everyone has some willpower. But how do you develop 
all the willpower you really need? I'll now show you how to 
take the willpower you already have and build on it so that 
it will be available to you when you need it most 
You probably did many things today even though you 
didn't want to do them: got up out of bed, caught the 7:51 
to work, dictated that awkward letter, ordered the Diet Spe­
cial at lunch, smiled cheerfully at Mrs. McPlump, who tried 
to tell you about her backache again, restrained your anger 
when your son came home with a rip in his best jacket, went 
to the PTA meeting when you really wanted to stay home 
out of the rain, held that yoga position an extra minute even 
though your foot cramped. 
149 
150 ALAN LAKEIN 
Try These Wfflpower-Boflding Exercises 
Well begin by doing some willpower-building exercises. At 
first well make them easy. The mistake most people make 
when they try to develop willpower is that they push too hard. 
When you go on a weight-lifting program, you don't start 
by lifting two-hundred-pound weights. If you'll set yourself 
easy tasks, you'll accomplish them. You wouldn't try to ride a 
bucking bronco if you didn't know how to ride a horse. Yet, 
you're making the same mistake if you try to gather enough 
willpower to lose thirty pounds off the bat. How about start­
ing with three? 
Good teachers know that children learn best when their 
work is at the proper level so they can make steady growth. 
Studies show that learning a new skill in industry is greatly 
facilitated if early efforts meet with success. The Royal Cana­
dian Air Force exercises build gradually from day to day so 
that the exerciser is hardly aware of the increased effort re­
quired to do the next day's exercise; yet the cumulative effect 
over several months is significant. 
Therefore, I suggest that if you want to increase your will­
power you begin by practicing in easy situations before ap­
plying the willpower you're building to do more and more 
difficult tasks. 
Normally, the only time when people consciously test their 
willpower is when they need it. But if you apply it only when 
the task is difficult and you need all the help you can get, it 
will not be surprising if you fail fairly often. 
The will is like a wild horse. If you want to train a wild 
horse to do productive work, you obviously can't tame it by 
running away. You have to keep in contact with the horse. 
There's really only one way to succeed: To get on that horse 
and stay on. Try to ride it. You may have to pick yourself off 
the ground several times, but stick with it. The idea is to stay 
with it even if the horse is going in the wrong direction. 
Suppose the horse is heading for its favorite spot far out in 
the pasture. It's on a course that will take it between two 
trees. You're not able to get it to do an about-face, but you 
may be able to alter its course. If you continue this process 
patiently, you'll eventually be able to get the horse to go 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 151 
How to Wean Yourself Away from TV 
At this point you've changed nothing about your actions. 
You're still doing something contrary to what you want to 
do, and you can't stop yourself. Claim credit for the decision. 
Go ahead, don't be afraid. Recognize that your will was in­
volved when you stayed in bed late or turned from your let­
ters to the TV. 
The first step is to train yourself to become less compulsive 
about "reflex" actions like watching television. But it's impor­
tant to start small and selectively. Is there at least some part 
of the evening's entertainment you could give up? 
You could decide that you'll turn down the sound during where you want it to go. You now have it "under control.** 
Having reached this stage, you can begin to turn its energy 
toward productive work. 
Increasing your willpower is like taming a wild horse. The 
key is to move forward in gradual stages, as I shall explain. 
It's an easy procedure. Indeed, it may seem too easy. Don't 
discount its potency because it doesn't demand much of you 
at first. Try it, you'll like it! And what's more, you'll find it 
extremely valuable. Here how it works. 
A person generally feels the need for willpower when he 
has rationally decided to do one thing, yet is strongly pushed 
or pulled by the desire to do something else instead. You 
plan to get up early and take an invigorating hike, but stay in 
bed instead. Or you decide to spend the evening writing let­
ters instead of watching TV, but find yourself drawn away 
from the letters toward an interesting program. In the face 
of some desire to the contrary, sticking with your initial deci­
sion can be very difficult. 
The next time you find yourself giving in to such a desire 
rather than persisting with your rational decision, make a 
clear mental note of it Admit that you're the one who de­
cided to stay in bed or to watch TV. Take credit for the "un­
wanted" decision. 
Granted, the decision may not have been one over which 
you had much control—you may have been acting as much 
from compulsion as from choice. Still, you did make a deci­
sion of sorts, and it did lead you directly to some action. 
152 ALAN LAKEIN 
all the deodorant, toothpaste, and aspirin commercials. It 
isn't long before the first toothpaste ad appears. True to your 
plan, you get up and turn the sound down. Then you get up 
again when the commercial is over and turn the sound up. 
You do this twice more and decide you're tired of bouncing 
up and down. You say to yourself, "I think this was a neat 
plan, but I will not turn the sound off any more tonight." Af­
ter all, enough is enough. When the next commercial comes 
along, you just sit there and congratulate yourself on not get­
ting up again. 
The next day you begin again with the same plan, and this 
time you get up six times before pooping out. Again you re­
fuse to turn the sound down after that However, during a 
particularly obnoxious commercial about midnight you find 
yourself starting to get up again. Now you cannot lose! If 
you get up and turn it off, congratulate yourself on your will­
power in going back to your original plan. If you do not turn 
it off, congratulate yourself on your willpower in resisting the 
desire to turn it off and sticking to your revised decision not 
to get up again. 
Interpret whatever you do as exactly what you wanted to 
do. This shows you're truly in control of your actions. 
The next night, try a different strategy. This time turn off 
every alternate bathroom products commercial. If you miss 
one, don't be the least concerned. Simply tell yourself, "I re­
serve the right to change my mind and I've decided that ITl 
make an exception in this case." Your making an exception 
also helps to demonstrate that you're not an inflexible ma­
chine but a thinking, feeling, spontaneous person. Be proud 
of it! Interpret all your actions as positive, as exactly what 
you want to do. 
After a couple of weeks, turn the sound up and down on 
other kinds of commercials (margarine, coffee, automobile). 
You're beginning to become more aware of how many differ­
ent kinds of commercials there are and how annoying they 
can be. You're also starting to suspect that there must be a 
lot of things around that are more fun than watching TV 
commercials. You can confirm this if you experiment by lis­
tening carefully to every word of every commercial the next 
night without exception. Notice how much willpower you've 
built up to be able to listen closely to something that you are 
now really beginning to dislike. 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 153 
One of my clients was particularly ingenious in developing 
his willpower while watching TV. In his first experiments he 
deliberately waited a few seconds until after the commercial 
was over and he did not turn the sound back up until after 
the program had actually resumed. He gradually extended 
this soundless time from two seconds to five and then to fif­
teen. Next he experimented with turning the whole set off 
when a bathroom product commercial came on, and read a 
magazine while it was off. Sometimes he decided to finish 
reading the page before returning to a program that was not 
one of his favorites. He continued experimenting and enlarg­
ing his area of freedom and the muscle of his willpower. He 
started turning the set on later and later in the evening. 
Within six weeks he was able to turn the set off during half-
hour segments which he knew from past experience would 
only be disappointing programs. And all this time his ability 
to acquire increased control over his time-wasting urges 
made him feel better about himself. 
When you attempt to develop your willpower remember: 
don't try to push yourself too far, between extending your ca­
pabilities gradually and stretching yourself so far mat you 
break. Don't push yourself beyond your limits of endurance. 
Think in terms of extending your capabilities gradually, 
rather than stretching yourself to the breaking point 
A Couple of Extra Minutes Help 
After you demonstrate your willpower in little ways, on lit­
tle tasks, on easy things, turn gradually to more difficult ones. 
If you must confront a very difficult task, don't be concerned 
with conquering it Be satisfied if you put up a little better 
fight than you might have six months ago. When you develop 
willpower, time is on your side if you improve just a little 
every day. 
Gradually you are developing the internal self-discipline, 
the internal desire to make good use of your time. This is 
more important than the desire to do a particular Escape or 
to avoid a particular A-l. Little by Utile you are getting 
more control over your time and over your life. 
The better your willpower, the less trouble you'll experi­
ence when you want to get involved in a project You'll have 
154 ALAN LAKE IN 
developed the habit of being committed to doing the best you 
can on whatever is in front of you. You'll be a do-it-now per­
son on whatever the A-l turns out to be. 
Although you recognize the limits on your endurance, try 
to go another sixty seconds before quitting your jogging. Al­
though you can't yet resist seconds on Mom's apple pie, you 
can ask her to make the second piece a bit smaller than 
usual. Although you don't like raking the leaves, you realize 
you're stuck with it and try not to make yourself quite as un­
happy as usual. What's the use of complaining to yourself ev-
erytime the rake misses a leaf and you have to go back 
again? 
Try to spend a couple of extra minutes on an unpleasant A 
before calling it a day. Cut back a couple of minutes on the 
C, even if it's your pet project. Don't turn to the TV for es­
cape from an unpleasant A. Remember: a little more will 
can eventually build up to a lot more willpower. 
23. DO YOUR BEST AND 
CONSIDER IT A SUCCESS 
ARE YOU WILLING TO SPEND every evening this week to 
make a start on attaining a lifetime goal even though success 
is not assured? If you don't try, you guarantee failure. If you 
do try you have the chance to succeed, but failure is still a 
possibility. What to do? 
Most people spend their lives minimizing losses rather than 
maximizing gains. For example, take reading the Sunday pa­
per. Do you read every page because you're afraid you will 
miss something? The more you move away from the front 
page, and those sections that you know interest you, the less 
news you will find. The result: You waste time reading much 
that doesn't really interest you, when you could have played 
with the kids, read a book or worked in your darkroom. 
Some people use up valuable time by endlessly weighing 
pros and cons for fear of taking a wrong step. Making "mis­
takes" can be a great time-saver. You find out what works by 
trying. You get rid of unrealistic goals by having tried and 
failed to accomplish them. For the rest of your life you 
might have continued to cherish the dream of writing poetry. 
But now that you've spent several evenings working steadily 
at it, you can assure yourself that given your personality, po­
etry is impossible—at least for the present. Forget it and find 
a more realistic goal instead. What may seem defeating at 
first is really constructive: You're building bridges that will 
eventually take you closer to where you really want to be. 
Studies have shown that people who hoped (and strived) 
for success were happier and accomplished more than those 
who feared (and expected) failure. If you're willing to accept 
the initial failures on your way to success, you'll find the en­
ergy you need to keep digging until you hit pay dirt. Don't be 
discouraged by "mistakes." Trial and error is part of being 
human. Think that each "mistake" is bringing you a little 
closer to eventual success. 
155 
156 ALAN LAKEIN 
I like to call this process **trial and success." I recall a par­
ticularly difficult period in my life when things just weren't 
going well. I kept telling myself that there were only a lim­
ited number of "mistakes" possible on my project and that 
each "mistake" I made brought me closer to what ultimately 
would work. The important thing was not to make the same 
"mistake" too often. Sure enough, I finally saw the light— 
long after I had hoped to be done with my job and after 
much more effort than I ever imagined at the beginning. 
From then on, things went better and better. With that ex­
perience behind me, I continually look for new areas to make 
do. It was trial and success. 
When you do something you've never done before, no mat­
ter how poorly it turns out, you're on your way to doing it 
better the next time. Whatever happens, you're further along 
than if you had never done it at all. If it seems hard to ac­
cept failure at first, remind yourself of that comforting 
saying: "If a thing is worth doing, it's worth doing badly I" 
The Value of Trial and Success 
A dance company was practicing for a new ballet and the 
leading man held the ballerina incorrectly. The effort looked 
very ungraceful. The director asked the man whether he 
wished to repeat the movement. The dancer replied, "No. It's 
not necessary. Now I know what to do." The failure made 
the rehearsal a success. The dancer now knew what he had to 
do. It was trial and success. 
In scientific research multiple "failures" commonly lead to 
success. The combined unsuccessful experiments of Marie 
Curie, Alexander Fleming, and Louis Pasteur run into the 
thousands. It would have been easy for any one of them to 
give up after the first hundred failures or so, but today we 
might have no radium, no penicillin, and no pasteurized milk. 
Or take the following extraordinary personal history of 
failure: 
Lost job, 1832; defeated for legislature, 1832; failed in 
business, 1833; elected to legislature, 1834; sweetheart died, 
1835; had nervous breakdown, 1836; defeated for Speaker, 
1838; defeated for nomination for Congress, 1843; elected to 
Congress, 1846; lost renomination, 1848; rejected for land 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 157 
officer, 1849; defeated for Senate, 1854; defeated for nomi­
nation for Vice-President, 1856; again defeated for Senate, 
1858; but in 1860 Abraham Lincoln was elected President of 
the United States. 
Life can only be led on a "best efforts" basis. To look back 
and say "I could have done better" is not realistic. O.K., so 
you might have wished to do better. And you can imagine 
having done better. But the fact that you didn't means that, 
under the circumstances, you couldn't. 
So don't let failure stop you from trying. Don't waste time 
worrying about what went "wrong." You can learn something 
from every experience. Remember: You're older and wiser 
than the last time you dealt with a similar situation, even if it 
was only fifteen minutes ago. 
The habits of a lifetime cannot be changed in a few days. 
It takes time—sometimes a year or two. There is no "Open 
Sesame" to getting control of your time and your life. But 
you can make much progress toward realizing your everyday 
and life goals in even a short time. I encourage you to begin 
as soon as you finish this page. I've seen remarkable results 
when people apply the techniques IVe recommended. 
You too can get more enjoyment from every minute, be 
more successful in your career and personal life, and accom­
plish more with less effort. Today can mark a real turning 
point for you. You can get more time out of your life. 
So what is the best use of your time right now? 
APPENDIX 
How I Save Time 
1. I count all my time as "On-Time" and try to get satis­
faction (not necessarily accomplishment) out of every 
minute. 
2. I try to enjoy whatever I am doing. 
3. I'm a perennial optimist. 
4. I build on successes. 
5. I don't waste time regretting my failures. 
6. I don't waste my time feeling guilty about what I dont 
do. 
7. I remind myself: "There is always enough time for the 
important things." If it's important 111 make the time to 
doit 
8. I try to find a new technique each day that I can use to 
help gain time. 
9. I get up at 5 a.m. during the week (and go to bed 
early). 
10. I have a light lunch so I don't get sleepy in the after­
noon. 
11. I don't read newspapers or magazines (except occasion­
ally). I do glance at the headlines at the newsstands to 
keep up on the world. 
12. I skim books quickly looking for ideas. 
13. I don't own a television set. (My family and I went to a 
motel to watch the moon walks and we rented a set for 
the political conventions.) 
14. I have my office close enough to my home to be able to 
walk to work. But when I'm lazy or in a hurry I drive. 
15. I examine old habits for possible elimination or stream­
lining. 
16. I've given up forever all "waiting time.** If I have to 
158 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 159 
wait I consider it a "gift of time" to relax, plan or do 
something I would not otherwise have done. 
17. I keep my watch 3 minutes fast, to get a head start on 
the day. 
18. I carry blank 3x5 index cards in my pocket to jot down 
notes and ideas. 
19. I revise my lifetime goals list once a month. 
20. I review my lifetime goals list every day and identify ac­
tivities to do each day to further my goals. 
21. I put signs in my office reminding me of my goals. 
22. I keep my long-term goals in mind even while doing 
the smallest task. 
23. I always plan first thing in the morning and set priorities 
for the day. 
24. I keep a list of specific items to be done each day, ar­
range them in priority order, and then do my best to get 
the important ones done as soon as possible. 
25. I schedule my time months in advance in such a way 
that each month offers variety and balance as well as 
"open time" reserved for "hot" projects. 
26. I give myself time off and special rewards when I've 
done the important things. 
27. I do first things first. 
28. I work smarter rather than harder. 
29. I try to do only A's, never B's and Cs. 
30. I have confidence in my judgment of priorities and 
stick to them in spite of difficulties. 
31. I ask myself, "Would anything terrible happen if I didn't 
do this priority item?" If the answer is no, I don't do it. 
32. If I seem to procrastinate I ask myself: "What am I 
avoiding?"—and then I try to confront that thing head-
on. 
33. I always use the 80/20 rule. 
34. I start with the most profitable parts of large projects 
and often find it is not necessary to do the rest. 
35. I cut off nonproductive activities as quickly as possible. 
36. I give myself enough time to concentrate on high prior­
ity items. 
37. I have developed the ability to concentrate well for long 
stretches of time (sometimes with the aid of coffee). 
38. I concentrate on one thing at a time. 
160 ALAN LAKEIN 
39. I focus my efforts on items that will have the best 
long-term benefits. 
40. I keep pushing and am persistent when I sense I have 
a winner. 
41. I have trained myself to go down my To Do List without 
skipping over the difficult items. 
42. I do much of my thinking on paper. 
43. I work alone creatively in the morning and use the af­
ternoons for meetings, if necessary. 
44. I set deadlines for myself and others. 
45. I try to listen actively in every discussion. 
46. I try not to waste other people's time (unless it's some­
thing that really matters to me). 
47. I delegate everything I possibly can to others. 
48. I make use of specialists to help me with special prob­
lems. 
49. I have someone screen my mail and phone calk and 
handle all routine matters. 
50. I generate as little paperwork as possible and throw 
away anything I possibly can. 
51. I handle each piece of paper only once. 
52. I write replies to most letters right on the piece of paper. 
53. I keep my desk top cleared for action, and put the most 
important thing in the center of my desk. 
54. I have a place for everything (so I waste as little time 
as possible looking for things). 
55. I save up all trivia for a three-hour session once a 
month. 
56. I try not to think of work on weekends. 
57. I relax and "do nothing*' rather frequently. 
58. I recognize that inevitably some of my time will be 
spent on activities outside my control and don't fret 
about it 
59. I keep small talk to a minimum during work hours. 
60. I look for action steps to be taken now to further my 
goals. 
61. I'm continually asking myself: "What is the best use of 
my time right now?"