1. WHY YOU SHOULD CARE 
ABOUT YOUR TIME 
TIME IS LIFE. It is irreversible and irreplaceable. TQ waste 
your time is to waste your life, but to master your time is to 
master your life and make the most of it. 
As a Time Planning and Life Goals Consultant, I have 
created a new system which is helping millions of people 
right now to determine the best use of their time—and so 
gain control of their lives. 
I'm not a "time and motion" organizer, trying to get every­
thing done in the shortest time with the fewest wasted mo­
tions. That kind of efficiency means taking the thinking out 
of an activity and reducing it to a series of mechanical 
routines. There is no attempt to keep it fun or interesting, so 
you might even say that such extreme clockwatching takes 
the life right out of an activity, along with the thought 
I try to put more thinking into what people do, not take 
the thinking out. If you follow my suggestions, you'll proba­
bly find yourself thinking more about how you really want to 
use your time, working less hard, doing more of the things 
you've always wanted to do, and enjoying your life a lot 
more. 
So please don't call me an efficiency expert. I'm an "effec­
tiveness expert." Effectiveness means selecting the best task 
to do from all the possibilities available and then doing it the 
best way. Making the right choices about how you'll use 
your time is more important than doing efficiently whatever 
job happens to be around. Efficiency is fine in its place, but 
to my mind effectiveness is a much more important goal. 
Some of the techniques of my system may surprise you. 
For instance, suppose you've got ten minutes before you must 
go to the dentist. If you're like most people, you'll fritter that 
time away. But I can show you how to invest those ten min 
utes so you can make a solid start on any big job you ma? 
have been putting off—like redecorating your home or an 
11 
V"'' 
12 ALAN LAKEIN 
alyzing your production costs. At the same time, I will help 
you to eliminate procrastination and maintain the momentum 
you need to get the job done. 
In this book you'll learn about the experiences of my 
clients, my family and myself in applying my techniques. And 
you'll see that my system is not inflexible, mechanical or bur­
densome. Far from it! It's fun to learn and fun to experiment 
with. The benefits come immediately, and then continue to 
grow. 
My system for effective time use has worked successfully 
for such corporate clients as A.T. & T., Bank of America, 
I.B.M., Lever Brothers, and Standard Oil Company of Cali­
fornia; for numerous local and federal agencies; for such 
busy people as recording star Neil Diamond; feminist and 
writer Gloria Steinem; designer Milton Glaser; Mike 
McCloskey, Executive Director of the Sierra Club; William 
Ball, General Director of the American Conservatory The­
atre; Mike Murphy, Esalen Institute president; Michael But­
ler, producer of "Hair;" and for thousands of executives, pro­
fessionals, entrepreneurs, homemakers, students, and others 
who consult me during my seminars or on an individual basis. 
I feel strongly about the value of my system because it has 
given me control of my own life. The system can also work 
successfully for your life and what you want to get out of it. 
I'm not necessarily trying to show you how to become pres­
ident of your company or how to juggle simultaneous careers 
as office worker and mother. With my system, you can 
achieve such goals—if they really are your goals. But you 
can also become a more effective college student, chess 
player, candlemaker or international playboy. It's entirely up 
to you. 
And please remember: There is no such thing as lack of 
time. We all have plenty of time to do everything we really 
want to do. If, like so many people, you're "too busy" to get 
things done, keep in mind that there are plenty of people 
who are even busier than you are who manage to get more 
done than you do. They don't have more time than you have. 
They just use their time to better advantage! Effective time 
use—like driving a car—is a skill that can be acquired, and 
in this book I have assembled all the tools you'll need. I'll 
show you sensible, practical ways so you can be the master 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 13 
of the clock—not its slave—and do what you want with your 
life. 
When all is said and done, there simply is nothing more 
important in your life than your time. I can't give you any 
more time than you already have. \Ve all mi'«* fln 16g 
hours a week. But I can help you to use the time you have 
more effectively. 
So let's begin! 
2. YOUR PAYOFF: 
CONTROL OF YOUR LIFE 
Control is A KEY concept in this book. Since no synonym 
can do justice to everything that I mean by control, let me il­
lustrate. 
Make your hand into a fist Squeeze your hand as hard as 
you can and feel the tension. If you hold the fist tight for 
even a few minutes, your hand will ache with the effort. Such 
a tensed, strained fist has few (peaceful) uses. 
Next drop your hand to your side. Keep all your muscles 
as loose as possible. You can't get much productive work out 
of your hand in that position, either. 
Now raise your hand slowly in front of you and make it 
come alive. Gradually move the fingers and feel the muscles 
respond with good tone and control. Here is a hand that can 
get something done! 
The kind of control I am recommending is in many ways 
analogous to good muscle tone. It is the sort of control over 
your time (and your life) that is neither too tight (i.e., com­
pulsive, restrained, obsessive) nor too loose (i.e., apathetic, 
indifferent, lazy). This kind of control will help you get 
things done and also allows you to be flexible and spontane­
ous. 
The ideal is balance. 
Beware the Time Not 
The purpose of this book is emphatically not to turn you 
into a compulsive clockwatcher, or into someone who is con­
stantly busy or aggressively efficient. To be more specific, 
here are three notorious characters that neither I nor any­
body else enjoys having around: 
The overorganized person is always making lists, updating 
lists, losing lists. When asked to do something, he tends to 
14 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 15 
spend much time considering every possibility, planning every 
detail, making sure that he has every base covered. He 
doesn't move without first planning the smallest detail, and 
consequently he often doesn't even get around to doing many 
things he should. He is more interested in feeling organized in 
his head than in accomplishing anything. If he doesn't get 
around to doing what he planned today—well, he'll just make 
a better plan tomorrow. He's so intent on being well-orga­
nized that he's often blind to changes, new opportunities, and 
the needs of others. 
The overdoer is so busy doing things that he has no time 
to assess their true value. He is a hard person to approach, 
even with a time-saving idea. He's generally disliked because 
he tells everyone else what to do. He lacks spontaneity and 
flexibility. He's terribly efficient, but as often as not is eagerly 
clambering up the wrong tree. With every minute of his time, 
both at home and at work, filled with activity, he never has a 
moment to relax. 
The time nut is overwhelmingly preoccupied with time. He 
makes himself and everyone else nervous with his concern 
about never wasting a minute. He's always rushing around to 
meet an impossible schedule. If a meeting starts even a min­
ute late, he frets and fumes. He keeps careful records in 
great detail of what he does every day. He knows how to 
save eleven seconds eating his cereal! Not an easy person to 
work or live with. 
If you think that trying to "get control" of your time and 
your life means becoming super-organized, super-busy, or 
preoccupied with every moment as it slips by, let me assure 
you that this is not the case. Each of the three types sketched 
above has taken a potentially valuable trait and turned it into 
a liability. Each is as badly off as the person who's totally 
disorganized, never does what he says he is going to do, 
never plans ahead, or goes through life from one crisis to an­
other. 
Neither extreme is desirable. Too much organization is as 
ineffective as too little. But there is no right answer. Different 
people require varying degrees of structure and spontaneity 
in their lives. What's more, the same person has different 
needs at different ages, at different times of the year, in dif­
ferent situations. The person who is well-organized at work 
may be very haphazard about his non-work activities. The 
16 ALAN LAKE IN 
person who at thirty has a clear set of goals and knows ex­
actly how he wants to use his time and his life may find that 
at forty he must break free of such plans if he is to grow. 
You're the Judge 
No part of my system is intended to be used inflexibly, au­
tomatically or mechanically. Its sole purpose and justification 
is to help set you free from internal and external restraints, 
not to take away one iota of your freedom and individuality. 
Time use is a highly personal, individual matter of choice, 
and you must be the final judge of how to apply the sugges­
tions presented in this book. It's important that you compare 
all of the things I say with the way you function best. As you 
read, assess your own strengths and weaknesses. Consider 
your own time problems and set priorities for what to im­
prove. Don't be afraid to mark up the book, reading with 
pen or pencil to make the book yours. Underline the key 
ideas, and makes notes in the margins. List the numbers of 
the pages that are most important to you in the inside front 
cover for easy reference. 
Pick and choose among the ideas. Recognize that different 
techniques work for different people, and that there are times 
when good advice for one person is useless for another. Se­
lect the ideas that will benefit you the most, and use them to 
help you lead a more enjoyable and satisfying life. 
It doesn't matter whether you're doing office work, house­
work, school assignments, or just loafing—I'll show you how 
to do whatever you're doing more effectively. I'll help you 
separate those tasks that matter from those that don't. Be­
lieve me: You can get the important ones done, even if they 
seem overwhelming, unpleasant, or impossible. 
Are you sick and tired of never getting anything done be­
cause you never get anything started? I'll show you how to 
end procrastination once and for all. 
Do you want to improve your concentration, brush off dis­
tractions and develop stick-to-itiveness? I'll show you how. 
Do you want to deal with the people around you more effec­
tively? I'll show you how to do that too—and keep them 
happy besides. 
This book offers tested techniques for performing under 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 17 
pressure, and will show you all the ins and outs of executing 
a project with tact, precision, and timeliness. 
If you're so inclined, this book can help you increase your 
earning power. Making better use of your time will endear 
you to your boss, or, if you're in business for yourself, will 
give you more time to ply your trade. 
Above all, this book will show you how to work smarter, 
not harder, with the end result that you have more time for 
yourself, your family, and your friends, or time to undertake 
that dream you've been putting off because you "haven't had 
the time." You'll feel less at the mercy of the uncontrollable 
elements of your situation and environment. You'll be better 
able to improvise, amend, and rearrange such elements to 
suit your personality, goals, and outlook. 
It might sound like a contradiction in terms, but I think 
that by the end of this book you'll agree with me that the 
biggest payoff of all in achieving greater control of your time 
and your life is greater freedom. 
3. DRIFT, DROWN OR DECIDE 
LOOKING UP from hex morning paper, Ms. Kay smells 
smoke and sees the kitchen curtains near the stove in flames. 
Is the best use of her time to (1) butter her toast and finish 
reading the news, or (2) do something about the rapidly 
speading fire? Whether Ms. Kay runs toward the curtains 
with a pot of water, calls the Fire Department on the tele­
phone, or dashes to the corner fire alarm box, no one would 
maintain that a better use of her time would be to butter her 
toast. 
Most choices, of course, are not so absurdly easy. After 
fourteen years in the auto industry, Mr. Williams was con­
sidering changing careers. His advancement had been good, 
but not as good as he had hoped. He found his job as pro­
duction manager for a Kalamazoo assembly plant only mod­
erately interesting. He was bored with Kalamazoo, and 
thought that living in Chicago would be more exciting. 
Mr. Williams was tempted to make a change. But which? 
Should he use his production-management experience to 
change industries? Should he seek a production job in Chi­
cago or some other large city? Should he move first, then find 
a new job? How should he go about looking? Or should he 
forget all about production and study to become a real-estate 
salesman? With so many different options, his final decision is 
not at all clear-cut. 
Like Ms. Kay and Mr. Williams, you and everybody else 
are faced with all kinds of decisions, some hard and some 
easy, some large and some small—every day. 
Who Can Do It All? 
Would you like to be a doctor, lawyer, Indian chief, musi­
cian, architect, artisan, baseball player? Would you like to 
18 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LD7E 19 
travel to Europe, South America, Nigeria, Timbuktu? It's not 
just a matter of talent and money. Even an Einstein or an 
Onassis can't do everything there is to do and see everything 
there is to see in the world. Decisions, decisions, decisions 
surround us all, clamoring for attention. 
How about today? Will you work, go to a show, read a 
book, visit friends, sleep late, play bridge? Your time is lim­
ited, but your imagination isn't. Most people, in just a few 
minutes of daydreaming, can come up with enough activities 
to keep them busy for weeks or even months. 
And what about all those things you have to do: draw up 
the report the boss is expecting, answer overdue correspon­
dence, pick up theater tickets, plan your vacation trip, lobby 
with the personnel man for a new assistant, worry about your 
son's school grades, go shopping for a new suit, go to the 
dentist, weed the garden? How can you possibly do every­
thing you ought to do today? 
Tomorrow there will be still more things to do. Life is a 
never-ending stream of possible activities, constantly being re­
plenished by your family, your teachers, your boss, your sub­
ordinates, as well as by your own dreams, hopes, desires, and 
by the need to stay alive and functioning. You have so much 
to do, but so little time! 
Your many options are to some extent a recent develop­
ment. In the not-too-distant past, when choices were fewer, 
life and its tools less complex, horizons more limited, people 
had less need to think about how they spent their time. For 
all but a privileged few, necessity dictated many actions. 
Other aspects of people's lives were determined by such fixed 
conditions as tradition, religion, social class, or where they 
happened to have been born. 
Today, with social, economic, and physical mobility a real­
ity for so many people, and with considerable leisure time 
available, the opportunities for and pressures of making 
choices have multiplied. The choices are often complex and 
difficult. This is especially true for women, who face a veri­
table explosion of new options. 
20 ALAN LAKE IN 
Everyone Wants Some Of Your Time 
Maybe you're at one and the same time a breadwinner, 
spouse, family member, bridge player, churchgoer, Lion's 
Club member, and a politically alert citizen. You must juggle 
the time demands made on you in each of these roles. Nor is 
that all. A dozen irate customers all demand immediate deliv­
ery of the same out-of-stock widget. All the family members 
clamor for your attention when you come home from work. 
Three television networks want you to watch their programs. 
You could spend a great deal of time reconciling these con­
flicting demands and trying to keep everyone happy. 
Some demands by others should be accepted graciously. 
When something is important to someone you care about, 
even if it's not important to you, remind yourself that you 
live in an interdependent world and this means sharing your 
time to some extent. 
After all, you knew when you "hired out" to work for 
your organization or when you married that you'd be giving 
up some freedom to decide how to spend your time in ex­
change for other things you consider important—love, secu­
rity, companionship, money, dinner. Face it. Sometimes 
you've got to do what others want you to do. But not always 1 
Doing What You Want To Do 
In discussing her son's future with friends, Mrs. Reed was 
quite emphatic about the best use of her son's time. After 
Jack graduated from high school he would go to college at 
his parents' alma mater. Jack had other ideas. He was tired 
of school, had doubts about the usefulness of formal educa­
tion, and felt that the best use of his time would be to travel 
for a year or two. 
What is the best use of Jack's time? The answer isn't clear, 
although certainly Mrs. Reed and Jack each have rather 
strong opinions on the subject. 
Who is the decisionmaker? Jack is. Mrs. Reed may claim 
to have the right to decide, but even if Jack does go on to 
college (if only to please his mother), he has decided. 
Situations in which you feel other people are making your 
decisions for you are not uncommon. A parent, a child, a 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 21 
spouse, a boss, a friend may seem to have as much say about 
how you spend your time as you yourself do—and sometimes 
more. 
That feeling may be understandable, but the fact is other­
wise. Ultimately, another person can only recommend what 
you ought to do—you and you alone make the final decision. 
You either accept or reject the recommendation. Of course, 
some decisions involve painful consequences. Your boss wants 
you to work on a certain project but you have your own 
ideas about what you should be doing with your time. If you 
continue to press your position, you may find yourself with­
out a job. But in many situations the element of free choice 
is quite large indeed. 
True enough, it may sometimes seem that you have little 
free choice. It is foolish to deny that age, education, back­
ground, economic status, sex, and race impose real limits on 
us all. So let's recognize at the outset that in everyone's situa­
tion there are uncontrollable elements. It saves a great deal 
of time to make a realistic assessment of what these are, and 
then accept them. Playing the game of wishing "// only I 
were younger ... or richer ... or poorer ... or smarter ... 
or more successful ..." is not a good use of one's time 
(though you may decide that doing something about these 
things is an excellent use of your time). 
There are constraints on everyone that make free choice 
impossible in all situations. But you are free to choose much 
of the time. Maybe you are kidding yourself if you believe 
outside factors are controlling your life. It could be you are 
not even doing a very good job in those areas where you do 
have control. 
Are You Clinging To The Past? 
Consider the case of one of my clients, a top salesman who 
was so successful selling his company's products that he was 
promoted to sales manager. He was proving to be much less 
successful in his new job, and came to me in desperation. His 
problem soon became apparent. Upon his promotion he 
faced a conflict between the old habit of doing the selling 
himself and the new necessity of training and motivating his 
salesmen to sell for him. Too often he was answering the 
22 ALAN LAKE IN 
question, "What is the best use of my time now?" as if he 
were still a salesman rather than a sales manager. 
The sales manager found that by consciously keeping track 
of the number of hours that he spent in the old and new 
roles he gradually was able to change his habits and channel 
more of his time toward his new responsibilities. 
Role adjustments are required whenever there is a major 
change in your life: going away to college, getting married, 
having children, changing jobs or localities, retiring. You 
want to be sure you are making time choices that are right 
for your current rather than your past situation. 
Why Deciding Is So Difficult 
At times everybody is faced with wanting to do different 
and contradictory things. Rational, emotional, and physical 
needs must all be satisfied, but cannot always be satisfied at 
the same time. Sometimes they have to fight it out. Work or 
play golf? Read your book or play with your child? Have a 
second cup of coffee at lunch or go back to the office? How 
to decide? 
Mr. Smith knew that the use of a dictating machine would 
save him time, but he hated talking to a blank wall. Should 
he listen to his rational part and save time, or to his emo­
tional part and dictate to his secretary? Mr. Smith thought he 
had solved the problem by putting a picture of his secretary 
on his desk when he dictated. This gave him the feeling he 
was talking to a real person who would transcribe his dicta­
tion. Everything worked fine until one day his wife visited his 
office to pick him up for dinner and discovered his secretary's 
picture on his desk. You can imagine the price Mr. Smith 
had to pay when he picked himself and the broken picture up 
off the floor. Perhaps Mr. Smith would have done better to 
put a picture of his wife and family on his desk to remind 
him where the money he earned went. 
Another kind of conflict makes it hard to choose: long-
term vs. short-term goals. Should you cook tonight's dinner 
or get ready for a weekend dinner party? Water the lawn or 
read your gardening books? 
Mr. Martin had a large backlog of work. To catch up he 
needed at least a month, yet management demanded there be 
no more than a week's backlog. Mr. Martin had figured out a 
TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 23 
procedure that would cut the processing time of each Hem in 
half, but his new system would take at least two months to 
implement. 
Should Mr. Martin tell everyone who knocked on his door 
for their order to come back in two months? This would give 
him the time he needed to implement the new procedure. But 
the back-order situation would be approaching chaos. 
Or should Mr. Martin keep struggling to get out the work 
as best he can, keeping at least some people happy as their 
finished work comes off the production line each day? True, 
it would take him longer to fill each back order, but that was 
the way it had always been done. And he would be showing 
daily progress on the backlog, something he couldn't do if he 
devoted his energies to instituting the new procedure. 
Should Mr. Martin emphasize the short term, and keep 
some work coming out daily—or the long term, and revise 
the procedure? Whatever he does, he's going to make some 
people unhappy. If he takes the short-term route, he loses 
long-term benefits. If he chooses the long-term route, he 
gives up short-term value. In a situation like this he might 
put the decision up to his boss; or decide to take either ex­
treme; or devise some middle-of-the-road compromise, get­
ting out some work daily but also moving the new procedure 
ahead a little each day. Whatever he does, he needs to 
resolve the conflict between the short term and long term if 
he wants to retain his job and his sanity. 
Making Decisions 
Your time use is the result of hundreds of thousands of big 
and little choices made each year, month, week, day and 
minute deciding what to do and how you should do it Are 
you aware of the reasons why, for example, you make cer­
tain social decisions? Here are some possibilities: 
1) Habit. For years you've gotten together with the 
Joneses once a month. You're beginning to lose interest and 
have to admit that you haven't had such a good time lately. 
Still, it's such an automatic routine that you continue to go 
out with them. 
2) Demands of others. Your husband keeps nagging you 
24 ALAN LAKEIN 
to invite over a couple who might prove to be helpful to his 
business; finally you give in although you do not like them. 
3) Escapism. You sit at home and daydream about how 
nice it would be to get together with another couple you re­
cently met, but you never quite get around to inviting them 
over since you are scared off by the possibility that they 
might think you are presumptuous. 
4) Spur of the moment. You suddenly decide you want to 
go to a show that evening, phone the Andersons to join you, 
but find they are already engaged, so you settle for going 
with another couple you don't like nearly as well. 
5) Default. You wait for other couples to invite you out, 
and therefore spend most of your time either at home or 
among people you might not prefer. 
6) Conscious Decision. You sit down with your husband, 
lay out a program of inviting over new acquaintances with 
whom you have a lot in common and old friends you haven't 
seen often enough lately. 
Spur of the moment decisions can be fine. Nor is there 
anything "wrong" with decisions that come about by default, 
the demands of others, escapism or habit. But if you are not 
satisfied with the payoff from those decisions, more conscious 
efforts are called for. How tempting it is in difficult situations 
to drift, dream or drown. But is that really what you want to 
do? There is an alternative. You can drift, dream or 
drown—or you can decide. 
4. CONTROL STARTS 
WITH PLANNING 
"I feel like I waste so much of my time doing things 
that are not really important to me, while my life is 
slipping away." 
MI have so much to do; there's just not enough time for 
me to do it all." 
"I'm harassed, overworked, tired, tense. I seem to be 
forever pushing myself, and can't ever relax com­
pletely." 
THIS IS WHAT I often hear from people who talk with me 
about their time problems. Behind each statement is a wish 
that things could somehow be different: "If only I could get 
on top of the situation." "If only I could be more like so-and-
so, who seems to have time to do everything and still man­
ages to be relaxed and happy." "If only I could do what I 
really want to do." "If only I were in controll" 
Control starts with planning. 
Planning is bringing the future into the present so that you 
can do something about it now. 
Everyone makes plans: what movie to see tomorrow night, 
which friends to visit next weekend, where to vacation next 
summer, big plans and little plans, realistic plans and far­
fetched plans, playful plans and serious plans. 
Most people plan rather haphazardly. They usually do it 
only when they feel forced to. Perhaps you feel overwhelmed 
by the work you have to do and this forces you to plan your 
day. Or you have a large block of uncommitted vacation 
time and you want to use it in a satisfying way. This kind of 
occasional, special-purpose planning is a valuable tool indeed, 
but it does have limitations. If you only plan this way you 
run the risk of not planning when you really most need to. 
I have never known anyone who was hurt by too much of 
the kind of planning I am going to recommend. I have 
25 
26 ALAN LAKEIN 
known many people who have suffered from failure to plan 
adequately. 
Learning From Professionals 
Consider the difference between an amateur and a profes­
sional photographer. The person who uses his camera occa­
sionally to capture a birthday party, a scenic view, or a 
family outing will snap a few pictures of the cherished mo­
ment, eagerly await the outcome, then, often as not, feel dis­
appointed with the results. Out of a dozen or so pictures, 
several will come out blurred, one will include only a part of 
someone's head, another will capture a frown rather than a 
smile. He will rightly conclude he is not a good photogra­
pher. 
The professional photographer proceeds quite differently. 
He shoots several rolls of film. When these are developed he 
studies the results, and discovers more bad shots than our 
amateur did. But because he has taken so many shots, he sees 
some that he is quite pleased with. 
Then he goes into the darkroom and considers what he can 
do to improve the good shots. He experiments with cropping, 
exposure, etc., and he ends up with perhaps half a dozen 
prints that he likes particularly well. He selects the very best 
of these and, after giving them further careful attention, ends 
up with a prize-winning photograph. 
These are the differences between occasional and serious 
time planners too. The occasional time planner gets a fuzzy 
shot of his goal, and may even miss the mark entirely. He's 
uncomfortable with the results; they seem hardly worth the 
effort. He concludes, and rightly so, that he's not a good 
planner, and gives up. 
On the other hand, the serious time planner will take many 
and frequent shots of his plans. What begins as a fuzzy, ill-
defined jungle of conflicts gradually comes into focus. A wild 
shot that does not really represent a desired goal gets weeded 
out. The more important aspects of the plan are refined and 
elaborated on so that more and more meaning is built into 
them. 
He checks as the days go by to see how he is following 
through on his plans. He looks for problems, false assump­
tions, hang-ups, and difficulties, and makes corrections where 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 27 
he has to. Like our professional photographer, he makes 
some readjustments and becomes better and better at what 
he does. 
A banker I know has his work time under control and now 
spends more time with his family on his boat. By planning his 
time carefully he's found it easier to take on new projects 
and adapt his day-to-day routine to fit his long-term plans. 
He is a good time planner not because he started out that 
way but because he put time and effort into refining his plan. 
Do You Know How You 
Set Yoor Priorities Now? 
Planning and making choices are often hard work. They 
involve careful thinking and decision-making. They also force 
you to recognize what criteria you use in setting priorities. 
The wife of a very talented filmmaker said during our con­
sulting session that she felt she was wasting her time. Her cri­
teria in setting time priorities, it turned out, revolved around 
her family's needs, when what she really wanted to do was 
structure her time in terms of her own needs. She came to 
realize that once she took care of her own time needs she 
would feel more comfortable coping with the needs of her 
family. 
Different criteria may result in different priorities and 
cause a conflict of interests. However, if you're aware of this, 
as the filmmaker's wife was after our consultation, you'll be 
better equipped to deal with the conflict. For instance, a 
teacher may be studying for an advanced degree at night. 
She cares about her students, but she also wants to better her 
professional standing. When she comes home from her own 
classes at the university, should she work on grading her 
third-graders' compositions or drag out that Comparative Lit 
paper she's been writing? If her criterion is her own students' 
needs, then she grades the compositions, but if her criterion is 
her own advancement, then a better use of her time is to 
work on that Comparative Lit. paper. Her choice depends on 
her priorities; whatever she decides, proper planning will en­
able her to recognize that she should settle the conflict be­
tween her own needs and those of her students. 
Many people seem to have difficulty planning because they 
regard it only as "thinking"—which aU too often translates 
28 ALAN LAKE IN 
into either "staring into space" or "daydreaming." They need 
a way to make a more concrete task out of planning. From 
experience with thousands of people I have concluded that it 
is much better to conceive of planning as "writing" than as 
"thinking." 
The following chapters contain a number of exercises, and 
I'll ask you to write the answers to some questions. Writing 
the answers down will reduce your tendency to daydream, 
and also help you make better decisions. I call the time when 
you plan "Decision Time," because that's what planning is all 
about—making decisions as to what and when and, if neces­
sary, how. 
In all planning, long-range, middle-range, or short-range, 
you (1) make a list, and (2) set priorities. All the items on a 
list are not of equal value. Once you have made a list, set 
priorities based on what is important to you now. In my 
opinion, no list is complete until it shows priorities. Whenever 
you make a list, finish the list by setting priorities. 
It's as Basic as ABC 
Use the ABC Priority System: write a capital letter "A" to 
the left of those items on the list that have a high value; a 
"B" for those with medium value; and a "C" for those with 
low value. As you do this, you know that to some extent 
you're guessing. You're not sure you'll be right on the value. 
But comparing the items to one another will help you come 
up with the ABC priority choices for every entry on the list. 
Items marked A should be those that yield the most value. 
You get the most out of your time by doing the A's first, and 
saving the B's and C's for later. Taking account of the time 
of day and the urgency of the items, you can break them 
down further so that A-items become A-l, A-2, A-3, A-4. 
ABC's are relative, depending on your point of view 
(remember, you are the decisionmaker). A task might be an 
A-priority while you're thinking of all the rewards that come 
when it is done. But halfway through, when the going gets 
rough and you don't like the discomfort involved in sticking 
to it, you drop it in the middle. Was it an A or not? Even so, 
if you doubt your judgment, whose is better? I say you are 
the best judge of your own priorities, and if you are not satis-
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 2* 
fied with the way things come out you need to improve your 
ability to focus on what you really consider important. 
The ABC's are also relative depending on what's on your 
list. The A's generally stand out clearly in contrast to the less 
important B's and Cs. In a work of art, attention-getters in­
cluding vivid colors and foreground details stand out from 
the background and catch the eye first Your A-items should 
be the attention-getters on your list. 
ABC's may change over time. Today's A may become to­
morrow's C, while today's C becomes tomorrow's A. You 
need to set priorities continually, considering the best use of 
your time right now. 
ABC's may further vary depending on the amount of time 
you decide to invest in a particular project. You could proba­
bly satisfy the boss with about two hours' work on the report 
he wanted (you feel it's a C), impress him with about four 
hours (now it's a B), and make a lot of points if you 
broadened the question under study and devoted ten hours to 
solving the more general case (you've made it an A). 
A few minutes worrying about Bobby's poor grades might 
help you come up with some good ideas to improve them, 
but it would be a waste of time to spend too long on it with­
out getting some feedback from Bobby and perhaps his 
teacher. 
While spending an hour a day playing with your youngster 
may be an A, spending six hours to the neglect of your hus­
band and house can at best be a B, and spending every min­
ute of the waking day amusing him so that neither the 
youngster nor you sees anyone else is certainly a C. 
Obviously, it's not worthwhile to make a big effort for a 
task of little value. On the other hand, a project with high 
value can be worth a great deal of effort. Only good planning 
will let you reap maximum benefits from minimum time in 
vestments. 
5. WHAT DO YOU REALLY 
WANT FROM LIFE? 
What are your lifetimes goals? 
How would you like to spend the next three years? 
If you knew now you would be struck by lightning six 
months from today, how would you live until then? 
IT MAY SEEM TRITE to say so, but perhaps you've never 
stopped to take stock. The basic resource that each person 
starts with is his lifetime—all the minutes, hours, days, and 
years that he is alive. It's only within this total framework 
that good time planning is possible. Which is why I recom­
mend you start by defining your lifetime goals. 
I'll soon get down to your minute-by-minute problems of 
today. But right now a written Lifetime Goals Statement will 
help you discover what you really want to do, help motivate 
you to do it and give meaning to the way you spend your 
time. It will give a direction to your life. It will help you feel 
in control of your destiny. And it will provide a measuring 
stick against which to gauge alternate activities as they come 
along. You'll be better able to balance the many aspects of 
your life. And you'll reduce unnecessary conflict over how to 
use your time. 
A Lifetime Goals Statement is neither magic nor a cosmic 
exercise in clairvoyance. There's really very little involved in 
getting one down on paper. Some people do feel a bit uneasy 
about it. They feel it's overwhelming. They claim it's embar­
rassing. Or they feel that a written plan will permit their op­
tions and take some of the creativity and spontaneity and fun 
out of their lives. Let me assure you nothing could be further 
from the truth. Over 15,000 people in my seminars and con­
sultations have composed Lifetime Goals Statements and I 
believe each one has come away with a clearer picture of 
just what he wanted to do with his life. Few of them had 
30 
TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 31 
'tten down their lifetime goals before they came to my sem-
So let me put the question to you: What are your lifetime 
als? 
In one way or another, whether you have been explicitly 
aware of it or not, you have been thinking about your life­
time goals almost as long as you have been alive. However, 
thinking about your goals is usually quite a different experi­
ence from writing them down. Unwritten goals often remain 
vague or Utopian dreams, such as "travel," or "becoming a 
millionaire." Writing goals down tends to make them more 
concrete and specific and helps you probe below the surface 
of the same old cliches you've been telling yourself for years. 
You can gain a valuable new perspective by seeing your 
long-familiar thoughts committed to paper, because you can 
then examine them more closely. Once they have an indepen­
dent identity, you can scrutinize them better. They can be an­
alyzed, refined, changed, updated, and pondered. 
Also, you most likely will discover goals that are important 
to you even though you never verbalized them or took them 
seriously before. This happens because writing requires you 
to be more specific; aims get narrowed down, because you 
can't write very many words compared to the millions you 
have thought in your lifetime. In fact, your selection of what 
you write down indicates priorities that might surprise you. 
If you have never tried writing down your lifetime goals, 
the following exercise will help you get started. If you have a 
goals list already, you may find it helpful to update your 
thoughts using this exercise. 
Your Lifetime Goals Exercise 
Get several pieces of paper, a pencil or pen, and a watch 
or clock with a second hand, and set aside about fifteen min­
utes. Write at the__top of a sheet of paper the question, What 
are my lifetime goals? 
(In identifying lifetime goals you should recognize that you 
would get different answers at ages five, twenty-five, and 
sixty-five. So you should interpret your lifetime goals as the 
goals that represent the way you see your life starting from 
right now and from the perspective you have today.) 
32 ALAN LAKE IN 
Now, take exactly two minutes to list answers to the ques­
tion on your paper. Of necessity, you will have to stay very 
general and abstract, but you should still have time to take 
account of personal, family, social, career, financial, commu­
nity, and spiritual goals. Try to make your list as all-inclusive 
as you can. Try to get as many words down in the two 
minutes as possible. During this listing stage you are not 
committed to any of the goals that you write down, so 
record whatever comes into your head. 
Don't be afraid to include such far-out wishes as climbing 
the Matterhorn, going to a group-sex party, eating a whole 
cheesecake, taking the year off, building a retirement home in 
Italy, chartering a yacht, adopting triplets, losing forty 
pounds by jogging an hour a day. There's nothing wrong with 
uncensored fantasies. 
After the first two minutes are up, give yourself an addi­
tional two minutes to make any changes necessary for you to 
feel satisfied with your statement of goals at this early gen­
eral level. 
You might identify one or two additional lifetime goals by 
looking for implicit trends in your current pattern of living. 
For example, if you diligently read books while commuting 
on the bus, you may have an unspoken goal of continuing 
your education. Regular reading of the newspaper may sug­
gest goals of keeping informed and entertained. You'll have a 
chance to decide later whether or not these are really signifi­
cant lifetime goals. 
The Second Lifetime Question 
When you list lifetime goals quickly and without much re­
flection, you probably include a number of generalities such 
as "happiness," "success," "achievement," "love," "making a 
contribution to society," and the like. You can pin-point your 
goals better by now asking a second question How would I 
like to spend the next three years? (If you are over thirty, 
change the "three" to "five" years.) Again list your answers 
as quickly as you can for two minutes, then take another two 
minutes to include whatever you may have missed the first 
time around on this question. 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 33 
The Third Lifetime Question 
Now, for a different perspective, write down this third 
question: // / knew now I would be struck dead by lightning 
six months from today, how would I live until then? (This 
means that you'd have only six months to live and would 
have to squeeze whatever you consider important into your 
dramatically reduced time on earth. Before you start listing, 
assume that everything relating to your death has been attend­
ed to. You have completed your will, bought a cemetery 
plot, and the like. Your answer to the question should con­
cern itself with how you would live these last six months.) 
The purpose of this question is to find out whether there 
are things that are important to you that you're not doing 
now or which deserve more of your attention in the next six 
months. You might continue to live as you do now; or, if you 
had the money, you might want to quit your job and live it 
up for the last six months. What would you do? Write your 
answers as quickly as possible for two minutes, then go back 
and improve them for an additional two minutes. (Don't get 
lost in thinking about this question—just write.) 
If you have read to this point without writing answers to 
the three lifetime goals questions, I urge you to go back and 
do it now. This is an important exercise, and doing it will re­
ally benefit you. % 
Working Further On All Three Questions 
Now spend an additional two minutes minimum reviewing 
and improving your goals statements in answering all three 
questions. You may spend longer if you wish. 
In looking over all three sets of answers you may have 
found that the answers to question 2 were an extension of 
question 1, and this is desirable. Some people also find ques­
tion 3 (the six-months question) a continuation of the previ­
ous two, but others are jarred into sharp departures from 
their previous plans because of the sudden realization that 
their time is limited. 
For instance, I probably wouldn't quit my work and travel 
34 ALAN LAKE IN 
around the world. I would try to do as much time-manage­
ment consulting as I could, and I'd definitely take off more 
time, but basically I wouldn't change very much because I'm 
happy in what I'm doing. 
Someone else may say, "OK, I'm going to stop where I am 
and I'm going to eat, drink, and be merry because I'm going 
to die in six months. I'll travel around the world, I'll use up 
all my money, I'll do all the things I've always wanted to 
do." There's no one "right" answer. The choice is up to the 
individual. 
For those who are happy doing what they are doing, the 
six-months question represents an affirmation; they'll con­
tinue along as they are. 
For those who come up with a completely different set of 
things to do, some real changes may well be in order. They 
shouldn't put in good time after bad. The six-months question 
will help identify some things they would do if forced by cir­
cumstance to take stock of their lives. The point is: With 
proper time management, there's no real reason why they 
shouldn't start doing most of their preferred activities today. 
Now you have a list of goals. But you have probably 
thought of more to do than there is time to do it in. This 
lack of time creates goal conflicts. 
Conflicts among various goals on your list need not neces­
sarily be disturbing. A goal to spend more time advancing 
your career may conflict with a goal to spend more time with 
your family. This competition for your attention can stimu­
late you to increase the quality of the time you spend on 
each. If, on the other hand, these goal conflicts cause you to 
feel frustrated, then a good use of your time would be to try 
to resolve such conflicts. 
How to Resolve Goal Conflicts 
Goal conflicts are resolved by setting priorities. You must 
decide which goals are most important to you at this time. 
Some conflicts will seem to take care of themselves when 
they are put down on paper. If an individual finds that he 
doesn't assign a high value to what he had long thought he 
most wanted to do, then chances are he really knew all along 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 35 
that other goals had higher priority. He simply hadn't faced 
the reality before. 
Other conflicts are much more difficult to resolve. If you 
are faced with a painful choice between two opposing goals, 
keep in mind that priorities can later be adjusted and re­
adjusted ad infinitum. Your goals are written on paper—not 
carved on marble tablets. 
If you are reluctant to set a higher priority for one goal 
(say, going back to school) and hence a lower priority for 
another (family time), you could consider each equally im­
portant. If you then allocate more hours to one than to the 
other, you can still tell yourself that they are equally impor­
tant. Even if they are mutually contradictory, or need to be 
done-in the same time period, you can console yourself by 
telling yourself that you're giving up one—but only for right 
now. Next week or next year you will give the other goal its 
turn. 
There is no other way. You must face up to the challenge 
of deciding what is important to you now by setting priori­
ties. Here is how to sort things out, using the three lists you 
have already prepared. 
How to Set Lifetime Priorities 
Take your Lifetime Goals list in hand and spend one min­
ute selecting your top three goals. Label the most important 
of these A-l. The second most important is A-2. The third is 
A-3. Do the same for your three-years list, and your six-
months list. 
At this point you have nine goals culled from the three 
lists. To pick out the three most important long-term goals of 
the nine, write on a fresh piece of paper, "My three most im­
portant long-term goals are. . . ." Then write them in order: 
A-l, A-2, A-3. You have now finished a preliminary Lifetime 
Goals Statement. You have zeroed in on just what it is you 
want to do with your life as you see it at this time. 
When I work with individual clients I spend a lot of time 
helping them refine their Lifetime Goals Statements. We 
might go through six or seven drafts over a period of two 
weeks before we come up with a statement that represents 
36 ALAN LAKE IN 
the client's true preferences. You too will find it helpful to at­
tempt refinements of the statement several times. 
Just as a photographer may shoot and reshoot the same 
scene to get the desired effect, your Lifetime Goals Statement 
will benefit from successive "shots." So tomorrow repeat the 
Goals exercise and compare the results. You won't get pre­
cisely the same answers, and the odds are you'll come up 
with additional information that you didn't include the first 
time around. That's just the way the human mind works. 
Since the Lifetime Goals Statement is not static, it should 
be revised periodically. A good time every year to reevaluate 
your statement is on your birthday. Even if you snapped the 
perfect picture last year, this year you are different and last 
year's picture is not an adequate representation of how you 
see things. Your lifetime goals statement should grow as you 
grow.