6. GET STARTED RIGHT NOW 
THE LIFETIME GOALS STATEMENT helps bring your future 
into the present by giving you a clearer view of what your 
ideal future looks like. The second tool for planning your 
time continues where the Goals Statement leaves off. It helps 
you decide on specific activities that you can do now to help 
you achieve your long-term goals. 
You cannot do a goal. Long-term planning and goal-setting 
must therefore be complemented by short-term planning. 
This kind of planning requires specifying activities. You can 
do an activity. Activities are steps along the way to a goal. 
Let's say you desire security. Putting $10.00 in the bank or 
talking to your stockbroker about your investment plans are 
activities that will move you toward your goal. 
When you have planned well on both long-term and short-
term levels, then goals and activities fit together like well-
meshed gears. Most if not all of the activities specified in 
short-term plans will contribute to the realization of the goals 
specified in long-term plans. 
How to List Activities Toward Your A-Goals 
If you wish to accomplish such goals as happiness, success, 
or financial independence, an immense number and variety of 
actions are of course possible. Suppose you just want to enjoy 
yourself tonight. I bet you could list twenty-five or fifty ways 
to do it without even including anything fattening or illegal. 
The same is true of any goal, no matter how crucial or 
trivial. 
To determine the right activities for achieving your A-
goals you must (1) list the possible activities for each A-goal, 
and (2) set priorities to allow you to select the most effective 
activity to do now. 
37 
38 ALAN LAKE IN 
In listing activities, be as imaginative as possible. Quickly 
write down as many ideas as you can—it's a good way to get 
creative juices flowing. Trying for quantity and speed will 
allow your intuition to operate. Your perceptions will come 
directly, unfiltered by your reasoning processes. Also, the 
pressure of having to list activities will crease new insights. 
The speed also allows you to run right past your inhibitions, 
because you simply don't give them a chance to operate. The 
important part of the Listing Activities exercise is to keep 
writing. You're wasting your time if your pen or pencil point 
is not moving across the paper. 
Do not make any attempt to evaluate or censor your ideas 
yet. This list is for your personal benefit only. If you attempt 
to hide anything, you'll be fooling only yourself. It's impor­
tant not to characterize activities as "good" or "bad" or 
"frivolous"—at least not while you're listing them. We'll 
catch the less significant activities later when we prune the 
choices. 
Also, don't handcuff yourself by the thought that you 
might not be able to do a particular activity. It may turn out, 
upon analysis, that you can do an activity even if at first 
blush it seems difficult or impossible. Just reserve judgment 
for the present 
And don't let the fear bother you that once you list an ac­
tivity you will have to do it. No one is going to force you to 
do it. When you set priorities you may decide that the re­
quired time and effort indicate that the activity is not worth 
the time and effort required. But even impossible dreams may 
have some future usefulness. 
If you run out of activities to list, you might try repeating 
a previous entry. Try variations on a theme, reactions to pre­
vious entries, extensions, additions, implications, reactions, 
greater or lesser detail, broader or narrower focus. The im­
portant thing is to keep writing! 
Suppose your goal is to become an expert mountain climb­
er. List all the mountains you might climb in order to 
achieve your goal, including the seemingly impossible 
dreams: the Matterhorn and Mount Everest. Perhaps your 
interest lies in conquering only North American peaks? Euro­
pean? Asian? Breaking activities down by categories, sub­
categories, and sub-sub-categories can help. The important 
thing is to keep writing. 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 39 
While Fve encouraged you to list as many activities as you 
can without censoring or inhibiting the responses you put on 
paper, I do have one caution: Don't confuse goals with activ­
ities. Remember, an activity is something that can be done. 
Your goal might be to live a healthier life. The specific activ­
ities that might contribute to this end could be not eating 
dessert tonight, exercising three times this week, and giving 
up smoking for twenty-four hours. 
Now you're ready to make your list. Take three fresh 
sheets of paper and write one of the A-goals selected earlier 
at the top of each. We're going to break your goals down 
into do-able activities. Keeping in mind the above instruc­
tions, spend three minutes making as long a list as possible of 
activities that could conceivably contribute toward achieving 
the first A-goal. Then spend three minutes each to list activi­
ties for the second and third A-goals. Go back over the three 
lists of activities, spending a mininum of three minutes on 
each list, adding, deleting, consolidating, refining, and even 
inventing further activities. Identify as many activities as you 
can. 
Let's take the case of a high school sophomore who wants 
to be a professional baseball player. This is an A-goal for 
him. But he also wants to go to college, another A-goal. And 
he has a third A-goal that is more immediate: He wants to 
be the starting pitcher on his varsity team. The latter A-goal 
is most immediate. To accomplish it hell keep in shape 
through the winter, running a mile every day and throwing 
indoors in the gym three times a week so that he'll be ready 
when spring comes. To make sure that he'll be accepted by 
the college of his choice (let's say USC, which has always 
had great baseball teams), hell keep up his studies. Preparing 
for an important math exam this week is an A-activity. And, 
of course, putting forth his best effort in a championship 
game is an A-activity toward his A-goal of being a major-
league ballplayer. 
A classic example is the woman who wants to return to 
work. Her three children are now in school and she has some 
free time. She worked as a nurse before her marriage twelve 
years ago. To reach her A-l goal of returning to work she 
has a number of A-activities she can do: taking refresher 
courses to help her catch up on what's been happening, talk­
ing with other nurses about recent developments, making sure 
40 ALAN LAKE IN 
that she*s satisfied all the current requirements, seeing what 
openings are available and how they fit into her schedule. 
Another good example is a person who is just graduating 
from college. His long-term goals include living a happy life 
and earning a comfortable income. But there's also the 
shorter-term goal of finding the right career. And that comes 
down to finding a job. The A-activities for now include decid­
ing what occupational areas to look into, talking to people in 
various fields that interest him, preparing a resume^ writing 
letters, making a selection, and finally going to and schedul­
ing interviews. 
One client I had felt he was wasting an enormous amount 
of time. He said, "I'm very unhappy in my job. I'm an insur­
ance salesman but I really feel I belong in public relations. 
I'm busy looking for a job every coffee break I get, and each 
lunchtime I'm on the telephone calling people and telling 
them what I'm looking for." 
It turned out that he had talked to five people in the past 
month, and those were the same five people he had talked to 
the month before. In short, he was getting nowhere fast. To 
find a new job in a competitive field like public relations he 
might have to contact fifty people a month, at a minimum. 
He should continually be trying new people as the old people 
did not pay off. This was his A-activity. 
Eliminate Low-Priority Tasks 
If you were conscientious in listing lots of possible A-activ­
ities you should now have too many activities and not enough 
time for all of them. The time has come for you to set priori­
ties: to switch from being creative and imaginative to being 
practical and realistic. The way to start is by spotting and 
eliminating low-priority items. 
For each activity on each list ask yourself: Am I commit­
ted to spending a minimum of five minutes (or less if it can 
be completely finished in less time) on this activity in the 
next seven days? If the answer is "no," draw a line through 
the activity. 
You don't have to offer any particular reason for crossing 
an activity off your list. You may not feel like doing it. It 
may depend on someone else who cannot help you in the 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 41 
next week. It may be too hard. Perhaps you're too busy this 
week. Leave only what you are committed to starting for five 
minutes (and possibly finishing) in the next seven days. 
If you have eliminated almost everything from your list, go 
back, taking as much time as you need, and come up with at 
least four items you consider meaningful and which you will 
put time into in the next week. 
Don't be concerned about eliminating large or important 
items (like getting a new job) from your list. If you don't 
want to tackle it now, draw a line right through the item so 
it doesn't clutter things up. You can consider it again next 
week. 
After you've pruned all three A-goal activity lists, combine 
the results into one list. This list will contain perhaps a dozen 
or so activities that are important and that you are willing to 
put time into during the coming week. The next step is to set 
priorities. Classify the most important activity as A-l, the 
best use of your time. Other A-activities should be numbered 
accordingly A-2, A-3, A-4. With these priorities in mind, set 
deadlines for the various activities and schedule them into the 
next seven days. If you go to a night school class three eve­
nings, that leaves only two weekday possibilities to have din­
ner out. Which day will it be? And if you are going to start 
reading War and Peace, when will you start? Perhaps com­
muting on the train to work? Make a note of such decisions 
on your list 
Pick a Priority for Now 
How can you move closer to your lifetime goals? Each day 
provides a fresh opportunity. Select at least one A-activity to 
work on right away and do it. You now have the beginning 
of an action program for achieving your lifetime goals. 
Initially, when you select the A-activity to work on each 
day, make it as short and as feasible as possible. If the A-ac­
tivity you have selected seems too overwhelming, divide it 
into smaller segments, then begin with the easiest part, or the 
one that involves the least problems, or the one you value the 
most. 
Once you've singled out and defined this one task, you've 
given yourself a clear priority for the day. In the sixteen 
42 ALAN LAKE IN 
hours or so that you're awake each day, you can find a few 
minutes to work toward fulfilling an important lifetime goal. 
How about starting now? 
The Lifetime Goals chapter and this chapter are funda­
mental to good time management For quick review, here are 
the essential points: (1) List possible long-term goals; (2) set 
priorities for now and identify A-goals; (3) list possible ac­
tivities for A-goals; (4) set priorities and identify A-activities 
for now; (5) schedule the A-activities; (6) do them as 
scheduled. 
7. HOW SCHEDULING HELPS 
IF YOU FELT overwhelmed before, you may feel doubly so 
now that you already have added the A-activities for now to 
whatever else you have been doing already. Presumably, you 
still want to do everything you did before (wash the dishes, 
go to work, shop), but now you want to do even more (the 
A-activities you identified in the previous chapter). 
To find a way out of this dilemma put your lifetime goals 
in the background for a few minutes and start at the other 
end of the time scale. What do you have to do today? 
Obviously, you need time for essential activities such as 
eating and sleeping, and while the amount nf time you allo­
cate to them may be variable, there are minimums necessary 
for normal functioning. Unless you are independently wealthy 
or have someone to support you, you will have to work to 
bring in money for food, clothing, and housing. This means 
dressing, grooming, commuting, and being on the job—all 
necessary and all time-consuming. 
Then you need time for routine tasks: getting out of bed 
in the morning, reading the morning paper, opening the mail, 
going to weekly staff meetings, keeping your work area or­
derly, watching television, washing dishes, chauffeuring the 
children. The routine tasks are determined by your position 
in an organization, family ties, civic responsibilities, social 
obligations, and the like. 
Essential activities and routine tasks are everyday motions 
that you don't normally think much about, and yet they fill 
up much of your day. In fact, they can easily preempt your 
life! 
One secretary complained to me that she never had time 
for special tasks that her boss wanted her to do and that she 
particularly enjoyed. After our discussion she realized the 
trouble: She spent her whole day on routine duties the boss 
had asked her to do the day she was hired—answering the 
43 
44 ALAN LAKE IN 
telephone, taking dictation, doing the filing, showing people 
into the office, answering questions, maintaining the station­
ery inventories. Her routine work load was so heavy that she 
wasn't able to absorb fun assignments. This is often true of 
homemakers, also. 
Recognize that you may be doing all you can by working 
very hard and conscientiously just to keep up with these 
routine tasks—if that is your choice. 
Today's tasks are also preordained to some extent by what 
is already in process: whatever got started yesterday, last 
week, or last month. It includes activities scheduled on a reg­
ular basis as well as commitments for which you have made 
special appointments. A celebrated author who was an over­
night success with his first book received many invitations in 
the year following his acclaim. Even though he would have 
loved to have a free day to spend with his family, or to begin 
work on a new book, he was committed months in advance 
to speeches, lectures, and TV appearances. On any given day 
he couldn't decide to sleep late or stay home and read a 
book. You too may find much of your time taken up by com­
mitments made long ago. 
Unexpected interruptions and crises make still further— 
and often annoying—demands on your time. You wake up to 
discover you left the headlights on last night and the battery 
is dead, so instead of getting into the office fifteen minutes 
early to catch up on some of your work, you find yourself ar­
riving two hours late. You learn that Mr. Jones has called 
five times to complain that the gizmo you promised him yes­
terday still hasn't arrived, so you have to rush around like 
mad to expedite delivery. 
Essential activities, routine tasks and previous commit­
ments coupled with interruptions and crises, can wipe out 
anybody's dream of having a few minutes to pursue a life­
time goal. But they don't have to wipe it out It all depends 
on how well you recognize (and deal with) these inevitable 
time-consumers and whether you are prepared to make time 
for yourself. I know of no other way: To increase the likeli­
hood of accomplishing important lifetime goals, you've got to 
plan your time each and every day. 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 45 
"Who's Got Time for Planning?" 
No matter how busy you are, you should always take the 
time to plan. The less time you feel you have to spare, the 
more important it is to plan your time carefully. Spend only 
ten minutes at the beginning or end of the day planning, and 
it will repay your efforts many times over. 
Sometimes you will be so busy that you'll feel you really 
don't have time to plan. O.K., maybe you don't have time to 
plan and do absolutely everything else you'd like to get out of 
the way. But think about this: By failing to plan, you will 
free very little if any time, and by failing to plan you will al­
most certainly fail to discriminate among ABC's. Even if you 
are confining yourself to doing A's, you still might not do the 
best A's. Therefore, although you think you never have time 
to plan when you are busy, you always come out ahead by 
investing time in planning anyway. Yes, I mean it: Exactly 
because we lack time to plan, we should take time to plan. 
Planning is usually done best first thing in the morning or 
at the end of the day. There are many advantages to plan­
ning in the morning when you are fresh. You gain momen­
tum as you go along. Having just thought about what you 
have to do, you move easily to getting it done. With the day's 
priorities clearly in mind you are less likely to be sidetracked 
as you go along. 
The advantage of planning in the evening is that you know 
where you have come from and this perspective helps you se­
lect activities for tomorrow. Also, if you have your day all 
set when you arrive the next morning, you don't have to 
debate what to do and consequently waste time. Another 
advantage is that your unconscious can work overnight on 
developing ideas so that you arrive at work all primed for 
action. 
The distinctly different benefits of morning and evening 
planning are both worth taking advantage of. So I suggest 
you plan in the morning as well as in the evening. 
Can you afford the time? I have had several clients keep 
careful track of how much time they spent on various activi­
ties during the week. They were conscientious people con­
cerned about time and planning, more so than the average 
46 ALAN LAKE IN 
person. They were convinced of the importance of planning 
and committed to spending as much time as necessary on it. 
They found that all of their planning time came to less than 
four hours a week. They concluded that it really doesn't take 
long to plan—considerably less than an hour a day—but the 
results are substantial: more A-l's get done, less trivia inter­
feres. Planning kept them focused on the important things. 
Some executives I know have made it a rule not to leave 
their offices until they have the next day's plan on their desks. 
A further extension would be to come in fifteen minutes early 
the next morning and sharpen up that plan. (Of course as in­
terruptions and crises come up during the day, still further 
adjustments must be made.) 
I do almost all my planning early in the morning. As hard 
as I try, I can't seem to average more than three and a half 
hours a week at it. I wake up around 5 A.M., before anyone 
else in the house, and I put this quiet time into my most im­
portant activity—planning. 
Every morning as part of my planning effort, I look at my 
Lifetime Goals list and identify specific A-activities I can do 
today to move ahead toward those lifetime goals. The rest of 
the time before breakfast I spend doing A-activities. Finish­
ing this book is one such activity and a lot of this work got 
done before my family got up. 
I recommend using Friday afternoon for reviewing the 
week, planning the following week's projects in a general way 
but those you'll do on Monday in detail. Use Monday morn­
ing for refining your plan and starting your A-goals of the 
week. 
How to Block Out A-Time 
One of the main planning tools I emphasize is scheduling. 
But scheduling means more than just fitting into the hours 
available all the things you must do: meetings, appointments, 
deadlines. It means also making time for what you want to 
do—your A's. 
In laying out a weekly schedule the key is to block out 
time for the A's that require a lot of time. Schedule large-
enough blocks of time to build up momentum. Reserve par­
ticular days of the week (say, Tuesday and Thursday morn-
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 4" 
ings) for major projects. Even if your day is fragmented by 
interruptions, you can still attempt to keep blocks of time in­
tact for the high-value A's. 
To find more time for the A's, set aside a special A-time 
each day and firmly banish all C-items during this period. To 
create a block of time for A's to get done, start small and al­
locate, for example, fifteen minutes each day to use exclu­
sively for A-items. You can gradually increase this time for 
the A-items as you grow more comfortable with the idea of 
putting first things first. 
Try blocking A-time horizontally on a weekly calendar—at 
the same time each day, say, Monday through Friday, 9:30-
10:30 A.M. You can also block vertically down the page—say 
reserving Wednesday afternoon from 2-4 P.M. as A-time for 
this week's A-project. 
One husband, whose wife was in the habit of accepting 
many dates for them to go out and who felt he didn't have 
enough time to be alone with her, went through her calendar 
and wrote "busy'' alongside all the Tuesday nights. When she 
was asked out for that date, she looked on the calendar and 
found that she was "busy." He thus freed A-time to spend 
alone with her. 
I've read articles in management literature suggesting that 
the way to get hold of your time is to record what you do 
every minute 24 hours a day, 168 hours a week. I emphati­
cally disagree with this approach; not only is it time-con­
suming and burdensome to keep track of all your time, but 
I'm convinced that it's a waste of time. Suppose you feel the 
need to make a change in your eating habits. You already 
know intuitively that you ought to reduce the quantity of 
fried foods and add a little more protein and a few fresh veg­
etables to help balance your diet. It would be a waste of time 
to keep track of every single item you eat before deciding 
what to change. On the other hand, keeping a daily record of 
the fried foods and vegetables you eat during a month can 
significantly help you decrease the fried foods and increase 
the vegetables. You immediately gain the benefits of better 
health, and you're freed from the drudgery of spending a 
month keeping track of everything you eat Likewise with 
time. I feel it's much better to watch your time selectively, 
keeping track of particular problem items which you feel are 
consuming an inordinate amount of time. 
48 ALAN LAKE IN 
In my experience, people who try to report everything find 
it so hopelessly complicated that they give up in despair 
within a couple of days without having made any changes. I 
believe that recordkeeping for sake of recordkeeping has very 
little value, but that selective recordkeeping for the sake of 
influencing the way you do a particular task has a great deal 
of value. 
Make a Time Change 
Just as you make a diet change, so you can make a time 
change. If you feel there's too much work time in your life 
and not enough family and personal time, start quitting when 
everybody else does and-stop working overtime; start schedul­
ing more weekends with your family. 
Too much golf and not enough civic activities? You don't 
need any complicated time-accounting to get you to cut back 
on the golf. Too much housekeeping and not enough time for 
creative pursuits? Let the dust accumulate for a day or two. 
You don't want to recordkeep but you do want to schedule 
your time, because you can find a great deal of time through 
careful scheduling of whatever you really want to do. 
Remember: There is always enough time for the important 
things. The busiest people are able to find time for what they 
want to do, not because they have any more time than others 
but because they think in terms of "making" time by careful 
scheduling. 
Trying to do the same thing at the same time each day 
both conserves and generates energy. It conserves energy by 
cutting down on indecision. You perform menial tasks by 
rote. It generates energy through habit—the habit of expect­
ing to make phone calls, plan the meals, read the paper, at­
tend a class, or go to a meeting—all at a particular time. 
You Have Two Kinds of Prime Time 
Another very important aspect of scheduling is "prime" 
time. Internal prime time is the time when you work best— 
morning, afternoon, or evening. External prime time is the 
best time to attend to other people—those you have to deal 
with in your job, your social life, and at home. 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 49 
Internal prime time is the time when you concentrate best. 
I know early birds who never get a good idea after 7 A.M. 
and night owls who are most creative between 10 P.M. and 
midnight. If you had to pick the two hours of the day when 
you think most clearly, which would you pick? From 10 A.M. 
to 12 noon? From 4 P.M. to 6 P.M.? The two hours that you 
select are probably your own internal prime time, but during 
the next two weeks you might check to see whether your 
concentration really is best during those hours. 
Try to save all your internal prime time for prime projects. 
Most business people pick the first couple of hours at 
work as their internal prime time, yet this is usually the time 
they read the newspaper, answer routine mail, get yesterday's 
unanswered telephone calls out of the way, and talk to col­
leagues and subordinates. It's much better to save such 
routine tasks for non-prime hours. 
One housewife experienced a great spurt of energy after 
her husband and kids left the house. She rushed around 
madly making beds, washing dishes, doing the laundry, pick­
ing up toys, so that by 11 she had gotten all of her house­
work out of the way. Then she collapsed until 2:30, when it 
was time to pick up her children at school. Her intentions 
were excellent: She thought that if she got all her repulsive 
chores out of the way she would have lots of free time for 
candlemaking, a part-time income-producing project she en­
joyed doing. But she found she was too tired after her chores 
to do her own-time things. Since she had the house all 
straightened up by 11, she was also reluctant to take out all 
her equipment and spread it all over the place and make a 
mess again. The result was that she felt she didn't have 
enough time for candlemaking. As an outsider I was quickly 
able to see that she was making a basic scheduling mistake. 
The simple change of reversing her candlemaking and house-
cleaning activities netted her two hours of prime time for her 
candlemaking project. 
The chemical research analyst who spent the afternoon 
skimming through professional publications for recent de­
velopments in his field and completing routine administrative 
forms was making the same mistake, but he did it in reverse. 
He was a late starter, and really got going after lunch. When 
he switched his routine chores to the morning, he had the af­
ternoon free to do the more creative part of his job. 
50 ALAN LAKEIN 
External prime time is when external resources (usually 
people) are most readily available for decisions, inquiries, 
and information. It's the time when you can catch the boss 
for that needed decision before he leaves for a week's busi­
ness trip. Salesmen recognize that their external prime time 
runs from 9 to 5—the hours when they meet face to face 
with their customers. So they schedule routine matters for 
before or after that period. 
It's important to make sure in advance that you're going to 
be able to see the people you have to. The housewife will 
have to make appointments to see the dentist, the doctor, and 
her hairdresser. She knows when the stores she uses for shop­
ping open and close. She's in touch with other mothers about 
the scheduling of next week's car pool to get the kids to 
school. 
The executive makes sure that when he places a phone call 
he has a high chance of finding that the person he needs on 
the other end is available. He has to know when his col­
leagues are free for consultation—and he should plan to take 
advantage of that time. 
Most people aren't very good at putting themselves into 
the other fellow's shoes, and therefore aren't very good at 
thinking in terms of another person's schedule. Yet there are 
big dividends when you do so. One executive I know spends 
extended periods with his boss during the lunch hour because 
he knows the boss rarely goes out. They have a sandwich in 
the office without being interrupted, since everyone else is 
out to lunch. 
Another choice time to catch the boss might be just a 
shade after he comes in, as he is taking off his hat and coat 
and before he has a chance to get immersed in other things. 
For Effective Scheduling—Stay Loose 
Flexibility is needed to accommodate whatever situation 
may arise. If you fill up every moment in advance with ap­
pointments, without any breaks except for lunch, you are 
bound to go home frustrated, nervous, and tense. 
The unexpected happenings need their time, too. Even with 
a light schedule in prospect, the incoming mail, visitors, and 
telephone may put enough demands on your time to create 
an overload. Experience will tell you that although you may 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 51 
not be able to anticipate specifics, there will be interruptions 
and distractions during the day that will take up your time. 
You need some slack time to handle whatever unexpected 
crises and opportunities come your way during the day. 
Therefore, always reserve at least an hour a day of 
uncommitted time. Leave holes in your schedule for recovery 
from a long interview, and set aside time enough to read the 
mail and catch up on paperwork. Try to get absolute musts 
out of the way early in the day so you will feel less frantic 
about interruptions and distractions. 
Rigidity in setting and following demanding schedules with­
out variation creates the feeling of being regimented by the 
clock, and living your whole life with a constant eye on the 
clock can be unpleasant. A proper balance of scheduled and 
unscheduled time carefully planned and then used well can 
help you get your life flowing more smoothly with fewer fits 
and starts. 
8. HOW TO FIND TIME 
YOU NEVER KNEW YOU HAD 
MANY PEOPLE "on the way up" allow their family and 
personal lives to be heavily impinged upon by work demands. 
Others are so achievement-oriented that they feel guilty tak­
ing time out for anything that is not in some way related to 
their work. 
Horror stories abound of men who work so hard that they 
hardly ever see their families and who end up with ulcers and 
heart trouble. One study several years ago of successful and 
unsuccessful executives indicated that many men who ulti­
mately fail had made their personal lives expendable to their 
jobs. 
My experience with clients has convinced me that when ex­
ecutives find themselves on a treadmill they tend to lose per­
spective of what's important. They spend time unnecessarily 
on secondary matters and let many important ones go un­
done. This often tends to be cumulative. The more overtime 
they put in, the more exhausted—and the less efficient—they 
become. The answer is not to spend more hours on the proj­
ect but to work more effectively within the time allotted. 
I recall one architect who came to me suffering from too 
much work and not enough play. He had only recently recov­
ered from a bleeding ulcer and again was working sixty hours 
a week. His complaint was that he never had time to see his 
wife and young children. I suggested that he take off at noon 
on Friday and, since summer was just beginning, take his 
family away to his favorite spot at Lake Tahoe. He rented a 
cabin, where he and his family spent each weekend during 
the summer. Not surprisingly, he fell in love again with his 
wife, got to know his children, and his health improved. Since 
he knew that he couldn't make up for low productivity by 
long hours, he concentrated on getting the important things 
done in the time he had. He actually got more done than he 
ever had working sixty hours, even though he shaved more 
52 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 53 
than fifteen hours off that total. As a bonus, he got some of 
his most creative ideas while he was relaxing at the lake, so 
his leisure time paid off handsomely. All he really lost by cut­
ting back those fifteen hours was the detailed drafting that he 
compulsively had felt the need to do himself. He delegated it 
to a draftsman. 
Can you work effectively if you are too fatigued from ex­
cessive hours? Probably not. Maybe a better solution would 
be to quit early, take the afternoon and evening off, and 
come back the next day refreshed and physically able to 
work twice as hard. 
Get More Done by Doing Nothing 
I think you will find that if you arrange things so that you 
find time to relax and "do nothing," you will get more done 
and have more fun doing it. 
One client, an aerospace engineer, didn't know how to "do 
nothing." Every minute of his leisure time was scheduled with 
intense activity. He had an outdoop-activities schedule in 
which he switched from skiing and ice hockey to water-skiing 
and tennis. His girlfriend kept up with him in these activities, 
although she would have preferred just to sit by the fire and 
relax once in a while. Like too many people, he felt the need 
to be doing something all the time—doing nothing seemed a 
waste of time. His "relaxing by the fire" consisted of playing 
chess, reading Scientific American, or playing bridge. Even 
his lovemaking was on a tight schedule. 
For an experiment I asked him to "waste" his time for five 
minutes during one of our sessions together. What he ended 
up doing was relaxing, sitting quietly and daydreaming. When 
he was finally able to admit that emotional reasons caused 
him to reject relaxing as a waste of time, he began to look 
more critically at that assumption. Once he accepted the fact 
that relaxing was a good use of time, he became less com­
pulsive about being busy and started enjoying each activity 
more. Previously he had been so busy doing that he had no 
time to have fun at anything. He began to do less and have 
more fun. When I saw him about three years later, he still 
had as busy a schedule as ever, but he was able to balance 
that activity with relaxing so that he came back to work 
54 ALAN LAKE IN 
Monday morning not pooped out from a strenuous weekend, 
but refreshed. 
In my opinion, nothing is a total waste of time, including 
doing nothing at times. Anything can be carried to extremes, 
of course, and I recall one client who needed to be pepped 
up from his indifference to any activity. He rediscovered his 
energy after we sat down with his unpaid bills and figured 
out how few days could go by before he'd find himself in 
serious trouble. 
Sometimes the only way to get more leisure time is to re­
duce arbitrarily the demands of the job. If your attempts to 
get more relaxation don't succeed, you may have to make 
some basic changes in your work situation. A credit manager 
for a men's-clothing store struggled overtime for two years. 
He never could get his boss to let him have an assistant to 
take over some of the details. He finally decided it was 
hopeless and found a job with another firm where he didn't 
have to work eighty hours a week, and had more time to 
spend with his family. The chief accountant in the same firm 
solved the same overload problem by deciding to do as much 
as he could and not worry about what didn't get done. His 
solution was more successful: When the boss saw that the 
work wasn't getting done, he let the chief accountant hire 
more help. The credit manager would have been a lot hap­
pier if he had similarly confronted his boss's stubbornness— 
or changed his job sooner. He could have saved himself two 
years of misery. 
The Homemaker's Special Problem 
The homemaker's problem of finding leisure time is partic­
ularly acute. The demands go on twenty-four hours a day, 
and such deadlines as getting a meal on the table or clothes 
on the family's back are unyielding. Interruptions tend to be 
traumatic; children get hurt or sick or need emotional help 
right now. Mother stays on the scene all the time. She can't 
turn off her job at 5 P.M. and come home to find dinner 
waiting. The truth is that, with purchasing, budgeting, minor 
repairs, husbandly complaints, family nutrition, keeping in­
ventory, deciding how many kids can wear this sweater or 
use that bike—on top of the physical labor of it all—a 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 55 
woman is running a tough little business in which the respon­
sibility is all hers. 
Given all these problems, a homemaker must work espe­
cially hard to find any leisure time for herself at all. The so­
lution gets back to scheduling. She has to schedule time for 
herself on a regular basis. One homemaker arranged for 
someone to come in every Wednesday afternoon; she was a 
theater buff and used Wednesday afternoons to go to a mat­
inee when there was something she wanted to see. Other­
wise, she had it free for museum or gallery visits, shopping, 
or seeing friends. 
I strongly recommend regularly scheduled free time for 
homemakers. If you say, "I'll take off some day or other this 
week," something always comes up that interferes. But set­
ting aside time on a particular day leads to the expectation of 
having that time and results in getting the time you want. 
One homemaker I knew had a standing Thursday evening 
date with her husband—to get out of the house, be free of 
the cooking, and enjoy a restaurant meal as well as the 
relaxed atmosphere. 
If a homemaker is on the alert for external changes that 
affect her time, she can often find extra hours that she has 
overlooked. One woman had entered an Adult Extension 
class on "The Changing Role of Women in Society." She had 
arranged for a babysitter and had gone each Tuesday after­
noon for several months. She knew weeks ahead when the 
course would be over, but she did not make any effort to 
schedule that time profitably for herself, and so she let the 
sitter go when the course ended. She could have furthered 
some other lifetime goals in the time that was open for her 
on Tuesdays. 
I find it a good idea on regular occasions to take a look 
two or three months ahead and ask what's on tap. What ad­
vantage can you take of the time when the kids are in school, 
or when your associates are on vacation? Note what events 
will influence your schedule in a major way: the semiannual 
national sales conference, the deadline for the seasonal cata­
logue. What has to be done to allow for pickup of activity 
after Labor Day? For people being away around Christmas? 
For the seasonable winter blues in February—maybe a week­
end in Bermuda or Mexico City? 
By taking note of these situations well in advance, you can 
56 ALAN LAKE IN 
often make or find opportunities for furthering some of your 
most important goals. 
Make the Most of Your Transition Time 
Tve suggested that you need to balance work and play. 
And again you might say to me, "But I don't have enough 
time for everything." Well, again I say, "Let's see if we can 
find some time." More specifically, let's see if you can find 
some time that you have previously overlooked. One kind of 
time that is often overlooked is what I call "transition time." 
This kind of time starts when you awaken in the morning 
and ends when you begin your regular day's work. For most 
people it amounts to about forty minutes a day, usually a bit 
longer for women than men. One man I know has reduced it 
to fifteen minutes. He uses the time only to do essentials—eat 
breakfast, shave, dress—and he does these as quickly as pos­
sible. 
There may be an advantage in extending rather than re­
ducing this transition time. If your day is broken into many 
parts, transition time offers you perhaps the only block of 
time you'll have alone and undisturbed. It is a good time to 
reflect on the best use of your time during the coming day 
and to consider those time management techniques that will 
help you get things done. As I mentioned before, I get up 
early—5 A.M.—and spend two hours of transition time plan­
ning the rest of the day and working on today's activities to 
further my lifetime goals. What is the right time to wake up 
in the morning? Almost every time you read about a busy, 
famous man (Senator Dirksen was one I remember), he 
started with paperwork at 5 or 5:30 A.M. and had accom­
plished mountains by the time the phones started ringing at 
9. 
There are other ways to enrich transition time. The late 
Robert Kennedy was reported to have listened to Shake­
speare plays while shaving. One creative manager, realizing 
that he got some of his best ideas in the morning, has come 
to expect them and "catches" them for further development 
while they—and he—are still fresh. This can also be hobby 
time for jogging, painting, sculpting, reading, writing, or 
whatever. 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 57 
How to Use Commuting Time 
If you feel it takes you too long to get to work, have you 
considered moving closer? In most cases this is not practical, 
yet more often than you might suspect a person does have 
the very real option of moving closer to his place of employ­
ment. If you're a professional person, how about working out 
of your house twice a week and skipping that forty-five min­
ute commute on the freeway? 
If you drive to work you're limited in the use you can 
make of the time you spend sitting in traffic jams. Safety 
comes first. But you can also listen to the radio. You can 
practice that new vocabulary exercise. More and more car­
tridge tapes on educational subjects are becoming available, 
so you might learn a foreign language, listen to a business re­
port, or take a memory course. Commuting time offers a 
chance to preview and plan your day, though you should 
crystallize that plan on paper as soon as you sit down at your 
desk. 
How to Use Coffee Breaks 
Coffee breaks can be a good time to relax. But suppose 
you're not particularly tense or tired. How about learning a 
word from your dictionary? Writing that unpleasant but im­
portant note to the bank telling them why your installment 
payment is late? Or calling your dentist for an appointment 
before that temporary filling falls out? 
The True Price of Lunch 
In some selling jobs, of course, the client is crucial, and in 
such a situation a working lunch may be beneficial. But by 
and large, a full-scale lunch is a fantastic waste of time. For 
most people, lunch just adds calories and expenses they can 
well do without. Many doctors today are dead set against 
"Three square meals a day," and many first-rate M.D. diet 
specialists either skip lunch altogether or have some cottage 
cheese and that's it 
Lunch time offers a great time to get things done while the 
phones are quiet and others are busy. On the other hand, if 
58 ALAN LAKE IN 
you have a hectic business day a lunch break may provide 
the only breathing time for you. In that event, if you cut 
back on your lunch time you might decrease your effec­
tiveness the rest of the day. Maybe this is a good time for 
you to take a walk or a swim at the Y. 
A general merchandising manager, recently promoted, no 
longer took a regular lunch time off. He felt that since his job 
involved more responsibility, he should be available all the 
time, and so he just grabbed a quick sandwich on the run. 
After several weeks of this, he found himself irritable in the 
afternoon, snapping at his colleagues, and having difficulty 
concentrating on important matters. I convinced him that he 
needed a sit-down lunch to restore his energy and inner calm. 
So he began having a more leisurely lunch and made certain 
that nothing interfered with this mid-day break. He de­
veloped the practice of going to lunch with a different person 
each day. Some were friends with whom he enjoyed a social 
occasion. But gradually he also lunched with all his subordi­
nates and got to know them better. When he had to ask them 
to do something for him or when they were asking him for 
help, he had the benefit of personal relationships to support 
those quick back-and-forth requests. 
He was careful, even though he took a long lunch time, 
not to eat too much, as he found it made him sleepy in the 
afternoon. But as this executive found out, what you eat 
might not be nearly as important as who you eat with and 
what you talk about. 
How to Use Waiting Time 
If you have to wait for the subway, bus, or your car pool, 
you can use those patches of time profitably, too. You might 
read the paper, but suppose you've had a lifelong goal of 
reading the classics. Most of them are available in paperback. 
You may not always feel like reading Don Quixote as you 
wait for the bus at the corner of Main and Pine, but isn't it 
nice to have the option? 
Waiting time can also help solve that particularly tricky 
problem that's been bothering you at work. Think it through 
sequentially. First, try outlining the problem step by step. 
Then, if you have more time, pick out an aspect that might 
be thoroughly explored in, say, five minutes. You probably 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 59 
won't be able to solve the whole problem, but at least you 
have the ball rolling. 
Make Yonr Sleep Work for Yon 
What time should you go to bed? If you decide to get up 
early, does that mean you should go to bed early? The largest 
single block of time is sleep time. Are you sleeping your life 
away? Doctors have found that often many people spend 
many hours in sleep for which there is no physical need. 
When these habits are changed and these people try to do 
with less, they often find no difference in health or efficiency. 
You might experiment with reducing your sleep time by, 
perhaps, half an hour. Give yourself a few days to get adjust­
ed to the new pattern. If you are as effective as you were 
before, you will gain the equivalent of a week of Sundays in 
the course of a year. 
There is great variation in sleep needs, not only between 
one person and another, but also for each person. Weekend 
patterns usually are very different from weekday habits. And 
if you always stay up Tuesdays because that's your bowling 
night, perhaps you've noticed that you're not unusually tired 
the following day. 
If you like, you can put some sleep time to work once you 
realize that most body functions continue while you are 
asleep. As your dreams show, your subconscious works while 
you sleep. Why not deliberately put it to work on your tough 
problems? Here's how: 
Pose a question to your subconscious just before you fall 
asleep. Select one that requires hours of thought—after all, 
your subconscious will have four to eight hours to work on it 
Now, don't waste time thinking about it consciously, but do 
expect a meaningful answer when you awaken. Many who 
have tried this method have found it successful. But if it only 
keeps you awake, by all means forget it. 
What do you do if you have to put eight hours a day into 
a job you don't like? Whether it's for a summer or a year, 
let's say you have decided to stay at least temporarily in a 
job that is not satisfying. If you're simply working to bring in 
money, is there any way that you can do more than just 
mark time? 
60 ALAN LAKEIN 
I had a fascinating talk recently with a young man who is 
a devoted fish breeder. He began breeding mollies at the age 
of ten and has worked his way up to breeding killifish. Proba­
bly because of his strong hobby interest—he spends three 
hours every evening on his fish-breeding project—he has 
found a very routine civil-service job. While he is filling out 
forms for the state, he also plans what he's going to do next 
about his fish. For example, he recently decided to breed a 
rare species of killifish which had to be imported from Af­
rica. These fish were being imported under the Endangered 
Species Act, and he did much thinking about how to breed 
them successfully in his second-floor apartment, quite differ­
ent from their natural habitat in the African stream. His 
routine job gave him the money and the free time he needed 
for his hobby. 
Hawthorne is a famous example of what can be accom­
plished while working in a humdrum job. He spent years at 
the Customs House in Salem, Massachusetts, and produced 
four novels, including the classic The Scarlet Letter. 
How to Repeal Parkinson's Law 
I feel that so long as people do the job they are hired and 
required to do, they shouldn't have to look busy every minute 
of the time. I have always tried to give the people who work 
for me a real incentive to make good use of their time by 
allowing them to do reading, writing, crocheting, or whatever 
they want, after they finish my work. I have even sent them 
home early when there was nothing else to be done. 
The policy of making people sit at their desks even if they 
have nothing to do breeds bad time habits and accounts for a 
certain amount of psychological aggravation. It isn't surpris­
ing that work expands to fill the time allowed for its com­
pletion, as C. Northcote Parkinson has stated, since all too 
often there are no alternatives available. I propose that it's 
time to repeal Parkinson's Law by allowing people to reap 
the benefits of getting done early and letting them do their 
personal things. 
In "limitless" jobs where there are truly an endless number 
of things that could be done—such as creating advertising 
copy, researching, selling encyclopedias, removing every 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 61 
speck of dust from the house—Parkinson's Law theoretically 
doesn't apply; there is always enough work. In practice, cer­
tain tasks tend to be done on a particular day and are then 
stretched out. You really can't push people to be creative by 
the clock, and beyond a certain point simply putting in the 
hours is not necessarily the best way to get creative work 
done, as the architect I mentioned earlier learned. 
Parkinson's Law is real, and work does expand to fill the 
time available, because you need to fill up time when you 
can't go home early. Try to convince your boss to let you go 
home if you've finished all your work by telling him what a 
great incentive it will give you to complete your work 
quickly. If you're unsuccessful, try to convince him to allow 
you to satisfy your personal priorities of reading books, writ­
ing your own letters, and the like while you handle the 
switchboard, the service counter, or the reception desk. 
Making the Most Out of One 
Spare Minute 
You can squeeze in a start toward your lifetime goals if 
you are ready to pounce on all the spare minutes as they 
come along and convert them into lifetime-goal/A-activity 
time. A very helpful way to do this is to develop what I call 
"special-emphasis goals" lasting from a week to a couple of 
months. Each day do something to squeeze in at least one 
A-activity for each special-emphasis goal. 
Let's say your lifetime goals include intellectual develop­
ment You decide to improve your vocabulary as a means to 
improving your intellect. A special-emphasis goal might be to 
learn a new word from the dictionary every day for a month. 
It takes only a minute to find a good word, check on its 
meaning, and think of a couple sentences you can use the 
word in. Then squeeze that word into your conversation 
several times during the day. 
A budding gourmet cook had a special-emphasis goal of 
trying a new vegetable dish each day for a week; she laid out 
the whole week in advance and each day pulled out a new 
recipe and was quickly on her way. 
A married couple, feeling a bit lonely, laid out a program 
of renewing acquaintances and meeting new acquaintances 
every weekend for a month. Their special emphasis goals 
62 ALAN LAKE IN 
applied to Saturdays and Sundays only. In a month they had 
eight very pleasant social evenings or afternoons, going out to 
dinner, playing records together, and talking politics. 
Isometric exercises can be squeezed in while you are mak­
ing dinner or sitting, or even while waiting for another per­
son to answer the telephone. Here again, if you keep in mind 
your added special-emphasis goal of fitting in some exercise, 
you will find many opportunities during the day to realize it 
Work goals can be developed as special-emphasis goals. A 
salesman can go after one big-ticket customer each day. A 
factory superintendent can personally check the quality of 
one finished automobile by driving it home directly off the 
production line. A freelance journalist can clip at least three 
story ideas every day for those times when he can't think of 
a thing to do. An office manager can take a couple of extra 
minutes to become more friendly and learn about a different 
employee each day. All these activities can be squeezed in 
when you have a special-emphasis program suggesting now is 
the time to make an extra effort toward realizing a particular 
goal. 
Not only are these A-activities on a special-emphasis goal 
a practical step toward getting where you want to go; they 
also become tremendous morale boosters. Daily you see 
yourself coming closer to your lifetime goals by remembering 
what you want to do—and doing it 
You don't want your special-emphasis goals to be out of 
mind because they're out of sight. Write the goal on a letter 
card and slip it into your pocket as a reminder. Or how 
about putting up a sign? I suggested to one client that he put 
a littie sign on his desk where only he could see it. It said, 
"Am I talking on the telephone too long?" He had admitted 
to me that he generally did talk too long. Putting this remind­
er by his phone each day for a week helped to reduce his 
overlong telephone calls. 
A homemaker trying to do the least amount of dusting and 
homemaking possible this week put a sign in her kitchen 
saying, "Get out of the kitchen and have a good time." 
No time? You've got to be kidding! 
9. MAKING THE MOST 
OF PRIORITIES 
THE MAIN SECRET of getting more done every day took me 
several months of research to discover. When I first started 
delving into better time use, I asked successful people what 
the secret of their success was. I recall an early discussion 
with a vice-president of Standard Oil Company of California 
who said, "Oh, I just keep a 'to-do' list." I passed over that 
quickly, little suspecting at the time the importance of what 
he said. 
I happened to travel the next day to a large city to give a 
time-management seminar. While I was there I had lunch 
with a businessman who practically owned the town. He was 
chairman of the gas and light company, president of five 
manufacturing companies, and had his hand in a dozen other 
enterprises. By all standards he was a business success. I 
asked him the same question of how he managed to get 
more done and he said, "Oh, that's easy—I keep a To Do 
List." But this was a list with a difference. He told me he 
considered it a game. 
The first thing in the morning, he would come in and lay 
out his list of what he wanted to accomplish that day. In the 
evening he would check to see how many of the items he had 
written down in the morning still remained undone and then 
give himself a score. His goal was to have a "no miss" day in 
which every single item was crossed off. 
He played the To Do List game much as you cover the 
squares on a bingo card, getting items on his list done during 
the day as opportunities presented themselves—talking to 
someone on the phone, bringing up points at a meeting, ex­
ploring a creative project in the evening with his wife. He 
made sure to get started on the top-priority items right away. 
Toward the end of the day he initiated whatever calls, ac­
tions, or letters were necessary to finish up his "bingo card" 
for a perfect score. 
63 
64 ALAN LAKE IN 
Again and again when I talked to successful businessmen 
and government administrators, the To Do List came up. So 
during one of my seminars I asked how many people had 
heard of keeping a priority list of things to do. Virtually ev­
eryone had. Then I asked how many people conscientiously 
made up a list of things to do every day, arranged the items 
in priority order, and crossed off each task as it was com­
pleted. I discovered that very few people keep a list of things 
to do every day, although most people occasionally make a 
To Do List when they are particularly busy, have a lot of 
things they want to remember to do, or have some particu­
larly tight deadline. 
Only a Daily List Will Do 
People at the top and people at the bottom both know 
about To Do Lists, but one difference between them is that 
the people at the top use a To Do List every single day to 
make better use of their time; people at the bottom know 
about this tool but don't use it effectively. One of the real 
secrets of getting more done is to make a To Do List every 
day, keep it visible, and use it as a guide to action as you go 
through the day. 
Because the To Do List is such a fundamental time-plan­
ning tool, let's take a closer look at it The basics of the list 
itself are simple: head a piece of paper 'To Do," then list 
those items on which you want to work; cross off items as 
they are completed and add others as they occur to you; 
rewrite the list at the end of the day or when it becomes 
hard to read. 
One of the secrets to success is to write all your 'To Do" 
items on a master list or lists to be kept together, rather than 
jotting down items on miscellaneous scraps of paper. You 
may want to keep your list in your appointment book. One 
executive keeps a special pad on his desk reserved for his 
To Do List. I know one woman who never buys a dress with­
out a pocket in it so she can keep her To Do List always 
with her. 
Another homemaker was forever losing the lists she made. 
She spent more time looking for yesterday's list than she 
spent making today's. To help her get control of her time, 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 65 
I had her put all her lists in a notebook. She had the added 
benefit of being able to cull undone A's from previous lists. 
Some people try to keep To Do Lists in their heads but in 
my experience this is rarely as effective. Why clutter your 
mind with things that can be written down? It's much better 
to leave your mind free for creative pursuits. 
What Belongs on the List 
Are you going to write down everything you have to do, 
Including routine activities? Are you only going to write 
down exceptional events? Are you going to put down every­
thing you might do today or only whatever you decided you 
will do today? There are many alternatives, and different 
people have different solutions. I recommend that you not list 
routine items but do list everything that has high priority to­
day and might not get done without special attention. 
Don't forget to put the A-activities for your long-term 
goals on your To Do List. Although it may appear strange to 
see "begin learning French" or "find new friends" in the same 
list with "bring home a quart of milk" or "buy birthday 
card," you want to do them in the same day. If you use your 
To Do List as a guide when deciding what to work on next, 
then you need the long-term projects represented, too, so 
you won't forget them at decision time and consequently not 
do them. 
Before you even consider doing anything yourself, look 
over the list and see how many tasks you can delegate. Not 
just to your subordinates or the babysitter, but to those at 
your level and even higher, who do a job more quickly and 
easily, or who could suggest short-cuts you'd overlook. 
Depending on your responsibilities, you might, if you try 
hard enough, get all the items on your To Do List completed 
by the end of each day. If so, by all means try. But probably 
you can predict in advance that there is no way to do them 
all. When there are too many things to do, conscious choice 
as to what (and what not) to do is better than letting the de­
cision be determined by chance. 
I cannot emphasize strongly enough: You must set priori­
ties. Some people do as many items as possible on their lists. 
They get a very high percentage of tasks done, but their ef-
66 ALAN LAKE IN 
fectiveness fs low because the tasks they've done are mostly 
of C-priority. Others like to start at the top of the list and go 
right down it, again with little regard to what's important. 
The best way is to take your list and label each item ac­
cording to ABC priority, delegate as much as ""you can, and 
then polish off the list accordingly. 
One person I know color-codes the entries, using black 
for normal entries and red for top-priority items. For peo­
ple who have trouble living with priorities, I have found 
that it's helpful to use one piece of paper for the A's and 
B's and another page for the more numerous C's. The A and 
B paper is kept on top of the C list, and every time you 
raise the A and B list to do a C, you're aware that you're 
not making the best use of your time. 
Items on the To Do List may be arranged in several 
forms. One form is functional: to see, to telephone, to follow 
up, to think about, to decide, to dictate. Or you can group 
activities based on the similarity of the work content (every­
thing about water pollution), the same location (several cus­
tomers in one neighborhood), or the same person (several 
topics needing the boss's opinion). You can have a single 
item on your To Do List represent a group (processing the 
papers in your in-box, doing errands). 
Don't Worry about Completing Your List 
Now go down your list, doing all the A's before the B's 
and the B's before the C's. Some days you may get all the 
items on your list done, but more likely there will not be time 
to do them all. If you are doing them in ABC order you may 
not even finish all the A's sometimes. On other days you will 
do the A's and B's and on other days A's, B's, and some C's. 
One rarely reaches the bottom of a To Do List. It's not com­
pleting the list that counts, but making the best use of your 
time. If you find yourself with only B's and C's left, take a 
fresh look at possible activities and add to your list items 
such as revising your filing system for greater accessibility, 
finishing War and Peace, picking out a birthday present for 
your aunt—all A's that were in the back of your mind but 
didn't make it to the original list. With a little extra time, to­
day they can be started. 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 67 
Many office workers, homemakers, and professional people 
have come to my seminars because they felt the need to "get 
organized." Most report a couple of months later that they 
feel much more organized simply because they regularly list 
and set priorities. For example, a newly appointed head nurse 
used the listing/setting priorities approach for her home life 
after she had found how well it worked at the hospital. Good 
time use is as important off the job as on it. You don't want 
to turn your off-work time into a work-like situation, but you 
can relax even more if those things you have to do are orga­
nized with the aid of a To Do List, then gotten out of the 
way quickly. 
The chief accountant I mentioned in the previous chapter 
spent his time making sure that of all the possible things he 
could do, he was really doing the most important. He took 
time to set priorities and went home feeling on top of his job 
because he had done the most important activities on his list 
If little things mean a lot a list of things to do in priority 
order means a great deal because it provides you with the 
security of knowing that nothing is missing; an affirmation 
of all your important activities; a motivation to cross off 
items you don't need to do; and a reservoir from which you 
can select activities to be done next 
By doing more A's and fewer C's, the hierarchy of your 
accomplishments will change. You can break up your old A's 
into new A's and B's, downgrading your old B's to C's and 
dropping most of the old C's off your list entirely. 
How to Do More Things That Matter 
For instance, a year ago attending Parents' Day at your 
daughter's school would have been rated A. But now you're 
involved in a part-time fashion-design business, and your 
daughter understands how busy you are and how much satis­
faction you derive from your business, so you won't go to 
Parents' Day unless it's a slow time in your business. Last 
year you attended to every detail of the annual inventory 
yourself. Happily, while you were doing it, you recorded the 
necessary steps so that this year, with that reference guide in 
hand, last year's A (figuring out what to do) becomes this 
year's C: following a routine. Now you are able to delegate 
68 ALAN LAKE IN 
the annual inventory to the new stock boy and use your time 
to merchandise your products better. 
The salesman who continually upgrades his customers finds 
that last year's A—the $100-unit customer—is this year's C. 
Now his A-customer is a $500-unit account; his B is a $250-
unit account. He upgraded his business this way by conscien­
tiously going after the A-accounts. He spent more and more 
of his time with those who bought over $100, so gradually he 
was able to consider anyone below $100 to be a C. To en­
courage this continual upgrading, he went through his cus­
tomer files each week and threw away at least one low dollar 
prospect or customer. In my experience, most salesmen could 
benefit substantially by arbitrarily weeding out 20 percent of 
their customers in terms of present and potential volume. 
Learning a musical instrument is much the same. When 
you first play the piano your A is to practice easy pieces. 
Once you become proficient, it would be a C to continue 
playing them. So you practice more and more difficult pieces. 
When you are learning a difficult piece, the A is to play it 
slowly but accurately and the C to play it fast with what 
would likely be many mistakes. As you become more profi­
cient in playing a passage, the A becomes playing the passage 
at its correct tempo. 
In learning and applying time use skills, it may be an A to 
watch how to spend every five minutes for an hour so that 
you become much more aware of time use. Once you be­
come automatically aware of time use, it is a C even to think 
about time passing unless you want to sharpen up that skill 
again. 
The good time user has a constant stream of A's going 
through the pipeline and is not hung up on which A to do or 
how to do it or trying to be a perfectionist about a particu­
lar A. Rather, he does a number of A-tasks daily and re­
members that as soon as he has identified the best use of his 
time, the time to do it is now. 
10. TASKS BETTER LEFT UNDONE 
HOW OFTEN HAVE YOU resorted to poking through routine 
work (to get a feeling of satisfaction because you're doing 
the processing efficiently) while you let more important ac­
tivities go because you want to avoid the feeling of doing 
them inefficiently? 
Resorting to desk-neatening and turning out gobs of trivia 
can provide more temporary satisfaction than tackling an 
important but perhaps frustrating high-value task. 
For example, neatening the desk. You would be unlikely to 
label this as an A-activity unless it's become a disaster area. 
But because it's such an easy thing to do and the results show 
immediately, you might very well spend an extra few minutes 
unnecessarily neatening your desk when perhaps the thing to 
do is get away from your desk and go out and see what you 
can do about the personnel problem that needs solving down 
in department 73. 
The harried field representative whose plane leaves in 
forty-five minutes gives one more instruction to the office 
help before going on a two-week trip. He is giving in to the 
urge to do a C which might very well mean messing up the 
most important A he can do, namely, catching the flight. 
Why do people have this strong tendency to get bogged 
down with C's? One reason is that many activities of top 
value cannot, by their very nature, be performed well. Part 
of the value may be that they have never been done before. 
Examples include: setting up a committee to consider manu­
facturing a new, highly competitive product; diapering a baby 
for the first time; learning Chinese; switching to organic 
cooking; finding something else to do with your evenings be­
sides watching television. 
The homemaker who collects another delicious-sounding 
recipe when she has five hundred untried clippings is giving in 
to the short-term feeling of a great find but is truly wasting 
69 
70 ALAN LAKE IN 
her time because she never gets around to using the recipes 
she has been collecting. She wastes her time clipping instead 
of providing her husband and children with the substantial 
meals that she really wants them to have. She may kid her­
self into thinking that she is making herself a better cook, but 
the truth is that she is clipping rather than cooking. 
You should not expect to do A-activities perfectly the first 
time. The problems associated with them are new, untried, 
unknown, and uncertain. Doing them means taking risks, 
which, whether calculated or not, will sometimes bring on 
unsuccessful outcome. An A-l may appear to be of over­
whelming complexity, or too time-consuming; or require 
reconciling views of people who can't or won't agree. 
With all these things going against executing a hard A-l, 
is there any wonder you look around for something you can 
do well? One of the things you can do well is clear up all the 
easy C's And you justify it by saying you are clearing them 
away so that you will then be free to do the A-l later. 
You have very cleverly set up a situation where you won't 
leave the, house until you empty the garbage, won't do the 
A-l until all the B's and C's are out of the way. It becomes 
more important to do the B's and C's than to do the A-l, be­
cause you won't do the A-l until ycju get the others done. 
You are making sure you do the B's and C's by hooking 
them onto the A-l. 
There is a certain luxurious feeling that comes from doing 
whatever you want without regard to priority or time in­
volved. Since you know you're not doing A's, you can waste 
time and gain the feeling of doing something well, starting 
something easy and finishing it, crossing an item off your list, 
and moving the paper from your in-box to your out-box. But 
don't kid yourself: it's because you're doing all those C's and 
not because you haven't any time, that you don't get to do 
your A's. 
The 80/20 Rule 
When I deal with people who claim they are overwhelmed, 
one of the best ways I can help them is to have them become 
more comfortable with not doing C's. But people are often 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 71 
very hesitant to let go of C's; therefore, I would like to sug­
gest to you the following: the 80/20 rule. 
The 80/20 rule says, "If all items are arranged in order of 
value, 80 percent of the value would come from only 20 per­
cent of the items, while the remaining 20 percent of the 
value would come from 80 percent of the items." Sometimes 
it's a little more, sometimes a little less, but 80 percent of the 
time I think you will find the 80/20 rule is correct. 
The 80/20 rule suggests that in a list of ten items, doing 
two of them will yield most (80 percent) of the value. Find 
these two, label them A, get them done. Leave most of the 
other eight undone, because the value you'll get from them 
will be significantly less than that of the two highest-value 
items. 
These examples, drawn from everyday life, should enable 
you to feel more comfortable about concentrating on high-
value tasks, even at the cost of ignoring many lower-value 
tasks: 
80 percent of sales come from 20 percent of customers 
80 percent of production is in 20 percent of the product line 
80 percent of sick leave is taken by 20 percent of employees 
80 percent of file usage is in 20 percent of files 
80 percent of dinners repeat 20 percent of recipes 
80 percent of dirt is on 20 percent of floor areas that is 
highly used 
80 percent of dollars is spent on 20 percent of the expensive 
meat and grocery items 
80 percent of the washing is done on the 20 percent of the 
wardrobe that is well-used items 
80 percent of TV time is spent on 20 percent of programs 
most popular with the family 
80 percent of reading time is spent on 20 percent of the 
pages in the newspaper (front page, sport page, editorials, 
columnists, feature page) 
80 percent of telephone calls come from 20 percent of all 
callers 
80 percent of eating out is done at 20 percent of favorite 
restaurants 
It's important to remind yourself again and again not to 
get bogged down on low-value activities but to focus on the 
20 percent where the high value is. 
72 ALAN LAKEIN 
A local political candidate came to me for advice two 
months before the election. He was the underdog against an 
incumbent who had been in office for many years. He recog­
nized that he would have to make maximum use of his time 
to win. But he had accepted many invitations to talk to unim­
portant groups, and found his schedule hopelessly clogged. 
Little of his time remained to go after groups with large 
memberships for crucial luncheon meetings and evening lec­
tures. 
He knew he had failed to exercise selectivity in accepting 
speaking engagements. While he felt that he could not cancel 
any engagements already accepted, he decided he would be 
much more conscientious about setting priorities in accepting 
future engagements. It took him some time to come around 
to this view, because he felt a great need to bring his message 
to all the voters. We ran down his list of speaking engage­
ments and discovered that, unquestionably, 80 percent of his 
exposure was coming from 20 percent or less of his speeches. 
The 80 percent of his time that was going to low-exposure 
speeches contributed little to his cause. In fact, they wore 
him out so that he was ill at ease and exhausted for those 
speeches that really counted. He recalled that Nixon spent 
the last days of the 1960 campaign rushing to Alaska, 
Hawaii, Wyoming, etc., to fulfill his pledge to visit all fifty 
states while Kennedy concentrated on the larger states that 
would given him an electoral majority. 
By the end of our talk the candidate realized he could get 
out of several unimportant speeches—they had not been def­
inite commitments—and substitute more significant appear­
ances. The real payoff for his selectivity came when he won 
the election handsomely. 
A wealthy woman socialite accepted too many demands of 
others. She could always be counted on to do anything from 
licking envelopes to twisting the arms of congressmen. She 
felt she wasn't getting as much pleasure out of all these activ­
ities as she might, because she was letting other people set 
her priorities. She needed to recognize that 80 percent of her 
voluntary activities were unsatisfying busywork, and that the 
real joy came from a few activities which she felt strongly 
about. 
What we did was sit down and create a massive list of 
over one hundred activities she had participated in (or agreed 
to participate in) during the past three months. She then 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 73 
looked at them objectively and developed a profile of her 
A's: helping political candidates, talking with interesting 
people, working in the field of conservation, and collecting 
art. Her B's included charity benefits, work above the clerical 
level for the parents' group at her children's school. Every­
thing else was a C, including supervising the church cake 
sale, doing hospital volunteer work, and participating in the 
women's group of the local symphony. 
What she did was to take her courage in hand over the 
next several months and say "no" to all organizations, people, 
and activities on the C-list. This gave her much more time to 
become really involved at the art museum. She even began to 
do a little research on Oriental vases. She also initiated a 
very well received reorganization of her neighborhood politi­
cal club. 
When Not to Do Cs 
One of the best ways to find time for your A's is by reduc­
ing the number of C's that you feel compelled to spend time 
on. 
The main question with Cs is "What can I not do?" Think 
of the great feeling of satisfaction of drawing a line through 
a C-item on your To Do List—without even having to go 
through the effort of doing it! Rather than think, "I have to 
do this C," get into the habit of thinking, "Maybe I don't 
have to do this CP 
Let's say your To Do List contains "Get the car washed." 
You have given this a C-priority, but are tempted to take a 
half hour out and get it washed anyway, just to get it off 
your mind and off the list. It is much easier to get it off your 
list and forget about it by deciding it doesn't need to be done 
at all. 
Many C's can be turned into what I call "CZ's." CZ's are 
C's that can be deferred indefinitely without harm. 
Definite CZ's include rearranging a pile of magazines, in­
ventorying the freezer (when you just did it last month and 
nothing has changed significantly in the interim), mopping 
the kitchen floor just before the children come home on a 
rainy day, checking the morning mail when your secretary al­
ways brings it in immediately upon arrival. You can probably 
74 ALAN LAKE IN 
think of many other items that are too trivial to do, or will 
settle themselves by the passage of time, or are best forgotten 
unless there is a demand from an outside source. 
Some C's need to be deliberately deferred to test whether 
they become CZ's. They go through an "aging" period to see 
whether or not they die a natural death. Such possible CZ's 
include: watering the lawn when it looks like rain, shoveling 
the snow when it looks like sun, bundling the newspapers to­
day for recycling when the Boy Scouts probably will be col­
lecting in the neighborhood next week, preparing a meeting 
topic that probably won't come up. 
When I am unsure of whether something can be ignored 
completely, I make a little note of the item on a 3x5-inch 
index card and stick the card in a file folder labeled "Pos­
sible CZ's," feeling secure that it will come up again some 
day if its important. Once a month I look through the file 
folder, and am able to throw most of the cards in the trash, 
congratulating myself on all the things I didn't have to do. 
Many C's can be turned into CZ's without any great trou­
ble and with little loss in value. Other C's, of course, must be 
done. Even though they are trivial, routine tasks, there is the 
possibility of great loss by failing to do them. You can make 
such C's palatable by thinking of the larger context into 
which they fit. A government employee who spends most of a 
day answering a trivial letter from a congressman makes sure 
it is done accurately and promptly, because when you work 
for the government it's wise not to arouse a congressman's 
ire. Similarly, the salesman who spends the better part of a 
morning tracking down a delayed shipment of a $2.17 part 
for his best customer can keep in mind that 40 percent of his 
entire earnings last year came from this one customer. 
When a C Becomes a Crisis 
Some things—such as refilling the gas tank in your auto­
mobile—that are C's and capable of being deferred, can de­
velop into crises if put off too long. There is no great advan­
tage in filling the gas tank when it is three-quarters full, but 
you do save time if you fill it when it is nearly empty, since 
this reduces the number of times you have to make a trip to 
the gas station. Needless to say, waiting a little bit too long 
can be very costly as well as time-consuming if you happen 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 75 
to get stuck on a deserted road with an empty gas tank and 
no gas station within twenty-two miles. 
A word of caution. Putting off buying insurance or making 
a will, even though you are in perfect health and can't imag­
ine any problems, is certainly not advisable. Nor is putting off 
such a relatively trivial chore as washing laundry. While 
dressing for a big Saturday evening party, you might find you 
have no clean underwear. 
Remember: Tasks rarely go from the bottom of the C-pile 
to crisis proportions without some warning. They gradually 
work their way up the scale. Let's say you've been asked to 
submit a routine production report. You have a hunch that 
this is a C that will die a natural death without your having 
to do anything about it. Several days later, a follow-up re­
quest comes into your in-box. You take the item from the 
bottom of the paper-work pile and place it on the top. Then 
a phone call comes in inquiring about the report. You now 
decide it's a B. When the boss says, "Give me this tomorrow 
or you're through," it becomes an immediate A and gets 
done. You can watch the priority of these items change. If 
you're smart, you will realize that fewer than one in a hun­
dred C's ever becomes a crisis. The best approach is not to do 
all the C's just in case, but rather to watch for the follow-up 
requests to tip you off to a potential crisis, then nip the prob­
lem in the bud. 
If you can let the dusting, washing, filing, or checking 
go one more day, then let it. You will have spent less of 
your life dusting, filing, and washing. If you continually re­
sist the temptation to do the C's, you can significantly in­
crease the number that become CZ's. Always keep in mind 
the question "How terrible would it be if I didn't do this 
C?" If your answer is "Not too terrible," then don't do it. 
You Need a C-Drawer 
Give the ABCs their place. Rather than let the high-qual­
ity A's get buried by the much larger quantity of C's, try re­
serving a special place on the top of your desk for the A 
items. Create a special "C-drawer" where the unimportant 
items can get dumped safely out of the way. If you already 
have a C-drawer, get yourself a bigger one, or a whole cabi­
net for C's to be kept out of the way. As a start, try physi-
76 ALAN LAKEIN 
cally separating your paper work into small A-piles and 
B-piles and a much larger C-pile. Re-sort the B-pile into 
either the A or C group, and then put the A's in the "A-
place" and the C's in the "C-drawer." 
If you haven't cleared your desk for a few months, take 
everything off the desk and out of all the drawers, and put it 
on a table. Going through it, you will probably find there will 
be some A's, some B's, some C's, but there will also be a lot 
of useless material that you can toss into the trash can. You'll 
know the operation is a success if you have to borrow other 
people's trash cans to get rid of your junk. 
If, like so many homemakers, you don't have a desk, then 
you probably have the same problem as Ms. Jones. She had 
one paperwork drawer where she dumped current mail, notes 
to herself, items clipped from magazines, her children's 
school schedules, notices of meetings and appointments, let­
ters to be answered, coupons, announcements of department 
store sales, bills and check stubs, magazine-subscription no­
tices, notes on the History of China course she took at night 
school two years before, string, ribbon and a fancy bow, and 
birthday cards. 
When the time came to answer a letter, she had no alter­
native but to pull out the entire stack of stuff and search until 
she found the letter she wanted. Similarly, at the beginning of 
each month she had to search through her whole pile to pull 
out the bills she needed to pay. She sought every opportunity 
to avoid going into her paperwork drawer. She even delayed 
answering important mail because she dreaded the search. 
The solution to her problem seems obvious—and it was, 
although not to her, because she felt so swamped. I suggested 
a file box, which she bought, and one hundred tabbed Manila 
file folders. She made folders for recipes, bills, letters to be 
answered, letters to save, make-up ideas, stitchery projects, 
coming events, children's activities, trips to take, books to 
read, and the like. Once she finally got her accumulation filed 
away, it was easy for her to take each new piece of paper 
and put it in the proper folder. Then, when she felt like writ­
ing letters she didn't have to use all the time finding the let­
ters that needed answering. She could go directly to the "let­
ters" folder and begin at once. 
No doubt many housewives have some type of filing sys-
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LD7E 77 
tem. The important thing is to keep the A's separated from 
the C's. If you have a lot of letters and correspondence, you 
might want to have separate folders for A-letters, B- and C-
letters. 
Every Housewife Deserves a Desk 
Even better than a cardboard filing box, if you can man­
age it, is a desk. The homemaker has a great deal of paper­
work, and she's entitled to a comfortable place to do it I 
have seen interior decoration suggestions for putting a little 
desk instead of an end table along side of a sofa with a lamp 
on it in the living room, or converting an unused corner of 
the kitchen into a paperwork place, using the kitchen drawers 
for paper storage. I heartily applaud such efforts to find the 
homemaker a paperwork place to call her own. 
The owner of a large clothing store came to me feeling 
overwhelmed by the quantity of paperwork that came his 
way every day. He was bombarded with information about 
new clothing lines, order and inventory forms from the many 
manufacturers he bought from, advertising and promotion 
ideas from his advertising agency, local papers and radio sta­
tions, and tax and payroll forms. He felt it necessary to open 
all the mail and examine it himself. In addition, he wrote 
many memos with ideas for improving the store and its mer­
chandise and salespeople's skills. 
He was continually reshuffling these papers, since he 
couldn't quite decide what to do with many of them. Also, 
there were so many good ideas that he hated to give any of 
them up. He knew he wasn't making ABC distinctions, and 
the pile of papers on his desk was overwhelming him. 
I enabled him to solve his problem by suggesting that each 
day, when the mail came in, he arrange it in priority order 
with the most important on top, then start at the top of the 
pile and work down. I had him put all of the B and C paper­
work he didn't get to that day in his right-hand drawer. The 
next day he began with the new mail and, if there was time, 
reached into the drawer and did some of yesterday's paper­
work. Often he would go home sorry that he hadn't gotten to 
a particular item, and so the next morning he would reach 
into his drawer and pull out that piece of paper and put it 
with his "today's" pile. Sometimes he would get a follow-up 
78 ALAN LAKE IN 
request for additional material on something he hadn't gotten 
to previously, so again he would reach into the drawer, pull it 
out, and combine it with the current mail. 
Not surprisingly, 80 percent of the paper he put in that 
drawer never got worked on. He did, however, take 20 per­
cent of it out of the drawer and process it with the day's 
work. 
When the drawer was full, I suggested he take all of the 
paper and move it to the bottom right-hand drawer. This 
worked fine for another three weeks, until the top drawer 
filled up again. He then went through the bottom drawer and 
threw away what he didn't need. And he repeated the process 
about every two weeks, or as he needed to. 
Next: The Wastebasket 
All along, of course, whenever he saw an opportunity, he 
threw paper into his wastebasket. Probably most of the pa­
pers that he had just taken out of the bottom right-hand 
drawer could have gone into the basket and never been 
missed, but he was reluctant to throw away something, so I 
suggested he take his stuff and put it all in a file folder labeled 
"C's from the bottom right-hand drawer, September 1-30.** 
When he had another batch of material, it was put in a file 
folder with the date on it and placed behind the first file 
folder in a large filing cabinet. At my suggestion, he contin­
ued to remove the contents of his bottom right-hand drawer 
to a file folder, which was then kept for a year. He found it 
most satisfying to make room for his current folder of C-ma-
terial by removing last year's folder and going through it 
quickly, congratulating himself on not having done so many 
things that turned out to be unimportant. At this point, he 
felt comfortable tossing out most of the stuff and keeping the 
one or two pieces of paper that still seemed to be viable. 
These went in priority order with that day's mail and were 
recycled to the middle drawer if not done that day. 
After a year it became clear that he had kept himself from 
doing much hard work that would have netted him very little 
benefit. For instance, his thoughts about sprucing up the 
shelves where he displayed sweaters were obsolete, since he 
had taken out the shelves and put in racks. His clipping about 
how to promote costume jewelry could be thrown away, 
since he no longer stocked jewelry. His reminder to himself 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 79 
about the inadequacies of the stock boy could be dispensed 
with, because the stock boy quit a few weeks later. 
How to Keep on Top of Paperwork 
The truth is that you need never shuffle a piece of paper 
again. This does not mean that you can stop handling paper. 
But you can develop a system that will keep the paper where 
it belongs and keep you on top of it—if you need to be. The 
system must take into account both incoming and outgoing 
paper, and what happens to it in between. 
Incoming mail should be screened and sorted. For a few 
days, examine all mail critically. Look for opportunities to 
eliminate or reduce the volume of paper that comes in. (You 
might find a series of obsolete reports to be discontinued.) 
You can then tell your secretary what material to screen out 
routinely and throw away, what to route to others or file di­
rectly. 
One executive has his secretary sort his daily mail into 
"Action," "Information," and "Deferred" folders. The "Ac­
tion" folder requires, and gets, his immediate attention. The 
"Information" folder he slips into his briefcase for reading on 
the train. He keeps the "Deferred" file, which includes his 
periodicals, in a drawer for spare moments or when he needs 
a break from concentrating on more substantial matters. 
You can encourage faster decisionmaking and get work 
out sooner by writing informal notes right on a piece of in­
coming mail and sending it on to the out-box. If you need to 
keep a record of the correspondence for your file, or want a 
reminder to check for follow-through, have your secretary 
make a photocopy. 
For correspondence that requires a more formal or lengthy 
reply, a dictating machine can be your best friend. Those 
who learn how to dictate a finished product on the first try 
rave about the time it saves. One executive saves even more 
time by dictating only key ideas and then letting his secretary 
construct a letter that accomplishes his purpose. 
Only Once, With Feeling! 
One of my best rules is "Handle each piece of paper only 
once." Try not to put down an incoming piece of paper that 
so ALAN LAKEIN 
requires a response until you have fired off that response. It is 
often easier to think of the right thing to say when you've 
just received the letter and your first reaction is fresh in your 
mind. In addition, you save the setup time required to famil­
iarize yourself with it again later on. 
Not all pieces of paper lend themselves to immediate and 
final action. Some papers linger for weeks or months and re­
quire many actions spread over time before work on them is 
complete. In some projects every word counts and polishing 
each word is a good investment. Sometimes you make better 
decisions if you put them off and think about them for a 
while. 
Therefore, the more comprehensive rule is 'Try to handle 
each piece of paper only once. If you can't, every time you 
pick up a piece of paper do something to move ahead the 
project it represents.*' If you can't take a big step, even the 
smallest step counts. 
For example, one executive might pick up a piece of paper 
and think, "This represents an unpleasant task. I can't bring 
myself to do it now, but the next time I pick it up I'll make 
a phone call and get it started." He has done at least some­
thing to move this project ahead by planning his next step. 
The next time he finds the same paper in his hands, he is not 
likely to put it down until he has made that phone call. 
On the other hand, don't do more than is necessary. One 
secretary complains that her boss is such a perfectionist that 
he never gets a letter out in fewer than three drafts, even on 
the most trivial correspondence. She, in turn, has gotten into 
the bad habit of giving him drafts that can't be mailed any­
way because of errors. 
Expect your secretary always to give you a letter ready for 
the out-box. Before you make any changes, ask yourself 
whether the time spent will significantly increase its value. As 
an added incentive against perfectionism, think about how 
much it's worth to you to have your letter in the hands of 
your addressee rather than tied up in your office for another 
revision. 
The next time you catch yourself needlessly shuffling pa­
pers, remind yourself that the most important things often 
are not on paper at all. Ask yourself what underlying situa­
tion the paper represents and how you would deal with it 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 81 
Coping with Information Overload 
Many people also do not discriminate between A's and C's 
when it comes to keeping up with news in their field and 
current events in general. Given a limited amount of time, 
what is the proper mix of reading the daily paper, weekly 
and monthly magazines, and books? Do you spend an hour a 
day on the paper, an hour a week on magazines, and an hour 
a month on anything as heavy as a book? Or do you let the 
daily and weekly events take care of themselves, focusing in­
stead on monthlies and books by experts and specialists in a 
particular discipline? 
There is no "right" answer to such questions; just what you 
decide is good for you. All I'm suggesting is that decisions be 
made consciously and then be acted on. If you decide that it's 
not worth more than ten minutes a day to read a newspaper, 
and you find yourself going back to an hour a day, question 
the validity of your original decision. You may decide to give 
a higher priority to newspapers. 
Many executives complain that they don't have enough 
time to read books that would be useful to them in their 
work. On the other hand, they find hours each month to read 
newspapers. Perhaps it is because newspapers are widely 
available each day, cost little, and are read as much for en­
tertainment as for news. Books usually require an effort to 
obtain, cost much more, are considered substantial, and are 
read "seriously." As a result, most executives read hundreds 
of newspapers a year and only a few books. 
Reading Books Like Newspapers 
If you feel the need to read more books for your work, try 
reading them as you would a newspaper, using the following 
procedure. Each day have your secretary put one book from 
a want-to-read (that you've given her) in your in-box. Have 
her take yesterday's book from your out-box. There is no 
harm in letting a book go to your out-box unread, since you 
would probably never have even seen it previously. most profitably if you were on top of your paperwork. Then 
"do it now." 
82 ALAN LAKE IN 
When you do pick up a book, start by reading the "head­
lines" on the book jacket, where the publisher sets forth what 
he considers most significant. Then glance through the book 
quickly, looking here and there for something of interest to 
you. Give yourself no more time than you would take to read 
a newspaper. 
The manner in which many non-fiction books are written 
suggests an approach to reading them. The author starts with 
a message he wants to convey, and summarizes it in a couple 
of sentences that he keeps in front of him as a guide while 
writing. He develops this message with the aid of an outline, 
then expands the ideas into enough pages to fill his book. 
Your job in reading a book, even if it has five hundred 
pages or more, is to find these key ideas and understand their 
application to your situation. The preface and table of con­
tents, as well as summaries that are sometimes found at the 
beginning and end of a book, will help you to do this quickly. 
Read the details only when something really meaningful to 
you seems involved. In this way you can gain much value 
from a book in a surprisingly short time. 
This method can help you upgrade the quality as well as 
increase the quantity of books you read. Because more books 
are at least crossing your desk, you can feel comfortable in 
setting aside one that has no appeal. On the other hand, with 
the exposure to a number of different books, you are more 
likely to come across ones that are worth careful study and 
will repay an investment of several hours' time. 
People soon forget much of what they read. Therefore, 
even if you did read all details of a book, you would not be 
likely to remember most of it anyway. If you've ever tried to 
summarize a book to a friend, you'll probably agree that 
what you recalled and considered worth passing on were only 
a few salient points. Since you remember little, it saves time 
to be selective and read only what is most likely to be worth 
remembering. 
Over the years you may have developed a library of books 
you have found especially meaningful. Once you may have 
studied these carefully, but with the passage of time much 
has probably been forgotten. You may want to use the news­
paper-reading method to review such books and refresh your 
memory of the key ideas. 
Sometimes you run across a book that may be useful in 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 83 
the future. Don't take time to read it now; you will have for­
gotten the details by the time you need them. Instead, have 
your secretary keep a note of the book in a special file for 
later reference. One doctor, who formerly had his office piled 
high with unread books, and abstracts, switched to a 3x5 
card entry for each item and now has some room on his desk 
to read. 
If you feel uncomfortable about the seeming superficiality 
of this approach to reading books, consider it a way of get­
ting started. Even at "newspaper" depth only, you are giving 
yourself a chance to absorb some useful new ideas. More­
over, you may find that your business reading becomes more 
enjoyable because you're now able to read more in less time. 
Should You Try Speed-Reading? 
Clearly, the faster you read, the more time you save. How­
ever, I find that few people who take courses in speed-read­
ing manage to maintain much increase in their reading speed. 
They can speed-read for a few weeks after the course, but 
most of them soon revert to their former pace. If you have 
to do a great deal of reading, it may be worth taking a 
speed-reading course, because studies indicate that if you 
read at least two hours every day after taking the course, 
you'll be able to maintain a higher reading speed. 
But I think it's more important to read smarter rather than 
faster. In other words, cut out the C-reading that is unsatisfy­
ing, useless, uninformative, or uninteresting and use that ex­
tra time and energy on A-reading (most likely at your 
former reading pace). Since you won't read as much, it's im­
portant to be selective about what you read. If you spend less 
time reading C's, you'll find more time for the A's. 
My wife and I have a hobby of reading aloud to each 
other. We read about twenty books a year this way. We 
could sit down side by side and read the same books to our­
selves in a fraction of the time if efficiency were our only 
goal. The reason I tell this story is to reassure you that the 
most efficient way to do something is not necessarily the best 
one. It is highly inefficient to read aloud—but a great way to 
spend time together.