11. ACCOMMODATING YOURSELF 
AND OTHER PEOPLE 
SOMETIMES THE WAY you use your time is bound to make 
others unhappy. Everybody likes attention. Giving each per­
son the attention he wants takes time. And you can't satisfy 
all of the people all of the time. If you've decided it's a C to 
attend all the parents' meetings at your daughter's school, 
you can expect her to be disappointed when you don't go. If 
you've decided to give up your weekly tennis game because 
it's no longer fun, you can expect your partner to be dis­
gruntled. If you've decided it's no longer worth your time to 
keep training an employee who doesn't seem to be catching 
on, you can expect him to be upset when you get rid of him. 
If you postpone delivery of Jones' order to satisfy an emer­
gency request from the Smith Co., you can expect Jones to 
be annoyed or apoplectic, and this time you might even lose 
Jones' business for good. 
It's a real dilemma whether or not to put aside an A of 
your own when asked to do something else. It might take a 
lot less time to do what is a C for you but an A for someone 
important to you—perhaps your spouse or your boss—than it 
would take to explain why you don't consider the demand 
very urgent On the other hand, you don't always want to do 
other people's A's at the expense of your own. 
You can never do everything that everyone wants—there 
just isn't time. You must set priorities based on the impor­
tance to you of the person doing the asking and the conse­
quences if you don't do what's being asked. If the person 
doing the asking, or what is being asked, is unimportant to 
you, you may choose to defer the request (at least the first 
time around). Some of these requests for action that come 
your way are soon forgotten or downgraded to C's by the 
asker and don't have to be done at all. 
84 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LD7B 85 
Learn to Say "No" 
Sometimes the best solution is to say "No" at the outset 
This one word, used promptly, properly and with courtesy, 
can save you a great deal of time. It's important not to let 
other people fritter away your time, but when you say "No" 
you have to make it stick while not seeming ruthless or un­
fair. And everybody knows how hard that is. 
You can tell the other person that you appreciate how im­
portant the activity is to him but you are too busy to help 
him out now. If it makes you feel better, apologize and men­
tion one or two of the A's that pre-empt your attention. Per­
haps he will see it from your point of view. He might even 
apologize to you for intruding on your time. 
Some people have a great deal of trouble saying "No." A 
client of mine, Ms. Filmore, found that she was spending 
most of her time on other people's priorities. When we looked 
at the situation together, it was clear to us both that she was 
saying "Yes" because she was afraid to stand up for her own 
priorities. Perhaps her trouble stemmed from childhood. Her 
domineering parents had always limited her actions and told 
her not only what to do, but when to do it 
As we talked she began to see that her reluctance to say 
"No" wasn't really fair to others. She realized that she would 
say "Yes" when there was little hope of her actually doing 
what was asked. In one instance, she disappointed a very im­
portant person who would have made other arrangements if 
he'd suspected that a "Yes" from Ms. Fillmore meant 
"Maybe." The realization that saying "Yes," and not deliver­
ing, was worse for all concerned than saying "No," helped 
her solve her problem. 
There are other ways besides Ms. Fillmore's to avoid 
saying "No." The administrative assistant who vows to fulfill 
a request "Right away" (whether he intends to or not), the 
colleague who offers sympathy when action is needed, and 
the mailroom clerk who claims never to have received your 
request in the first place, are all wasting your time and theirs 
because they have not learned to say "No." To do this is sim-
86 ALAN LAKE IN 
ply poor ethics, poor business, poor personal relations, and it 
can make life harder for everyone in the future. 
Compromises that Work 
What can you do if the person doing the asking is your 
spouse, your boss, your child, your parent, or your best 
friend and you don't feel you can out-and-out say "No"? You 
can often satisfy other people and still not completely sacri­
fice your own priorities if you look for compromises. 
When another person asks you to do something for him 
right away, he may well be more interested in speed than 
perfection. If you feel his demands on your time are reason­
able, look for short-cuts. If your boss unexpectedly asks for a 
quick report on the month's sales, chances are hell settle for 
a brief survey provided he gets it right away. If your daugh­
ter asks you on short notice to make her a new dress for a 
party, propose a quickly-made skirt instead. 
Other people may habitually turn to you for particular 
tasks because you have, in effect, trained them to do so. 
Maybe it used to be your A to pack the family's lunches, but 
now that the kids are older, you've found an interesting sell­
ing job. You'll have to wean them away from having mother 
do it, perhaps by rotating the responsibility for preparing 
lunch. In business, you could encourage a demanding cus­
tomer to go directly to the service department instead of de­
pending on you for help, by explaining that his requests will 
be handled with greater speed. 
Another solution to conflicting priorities (his A, your C) is 
discussion. If you feel harassed at home, try sitting down 
with your husband and listing your respective household du­
ties. This will put into perspective how much you are already 
doing, and perhaps hell see that all the demands on your 
time are unreasonable. This may never have occurred to him 
before, and you can adjust your duties to free more time for 
your A's. 
When you are working in a cooperative effort with an as­
sociate, start by reviewing your To Do List and his. Look for 
those items which you both agree have high priority. Then 
try to enlarge the area of agreement by examining those 
items to which you have assigned different priorities. Express 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 87 
your point of view, and try to convince him that what he 
thought was an A is really a C. Listen to him, too, and try to 
understand his viewpoint. Be prepared to change your own 
assessment of the priorities if he can make a convincing case 
that what you called a C is really an A. 
When agreement cannot be reached, trade-offs are a good 
idea. In return for doing his A (although it is of little value 
to you), ask that he do one of your A's. This also works well 
in reverse: "I won't ask you to do this if you don't ask me to 
do that" isn't childish; it can be a handy way to rid yourself 
of time-consuming C's by simple exchange. 
Time-Sharing 
When there are several people competing for your time 
and attention, some system that is fair to everyone generally 
works best. Sally of the steno pool, with half a dozen "boss­
es," does the work given to her in the order received. If Mr. 
Bracken has a special rush job, it gets immediate attention. If 
two people in the office need their work "right away," she 
can't satisfy both demands. But she can set her own priorities, 
point out the conflict and let them fight it out, or go to her 
supervisor for a decision. 
Time-sharing, as fairness, can be particularly important to 
children, who will often compete for the time and attention 
of parents. For example, at our dinner table there is one 
seat—the one closest to my wife and me—that each of our 
children prefers. We'd like to have all our children sit next to 
us all the time but that's a physical impossibility. In the inter­
est of fair play, we rotate the seat by using a simple numeri­
cal system, taking the day of the month and dividing it by 
three. If there's no remainder, it's our youngest child David's 
turn; if there's a remainder of one, our middle child Diane 
gets the seat; and if there's a remainder of two, the seat goes 
to Carol, the eldest. 
At bedtime we use a different solution that assures each 
child an equal share of attention. Fortunately they go to bed 
at different times. My wife sets a timer, and just before bed­
time, each child receives fifteen minutes of undivided parental 
attention to use in any way he or she wants. 
Whichever of the many strategies you adopt to keep other 
88 ALAN LAKEfN 
people's requests from swamping you, it pays to be gracious. 
And if you make a special effort to be considerate of other 
people and their time, they will be likely to respect you and 
your time. 
And isn't that what you want—time to do your thing? 
12. HOW TO CREATE QUIET TIME 
FOR YOURSELF 
So YOU HAVE blocked out time on your calendar for heavy 
thinking. Now the question is: Will you be left alone so you 
can really concentrate? As any office worker knows, just be­
cause you decide you want to be alone doesn't mean that vis­
itors and telephone calls will magically stop intruding. Fur­
thermore, are you sure you really want everybody to stay 
away from you? Most people need to be in touch with other 
people to conduct their business. The point is that there are 
ways to regulate this traffic. 
"Do you have a minute?" usually means "May I have your 
attention now to talk about something that will take an un­
specified length of time?" So the next time someone asks, "Do 
you have a minute?" you might say, "Can we really do it in a 
minute?" or "Sure, I have a minute now, but if it takes long-
ger we'll have to do it later." 
Who is doing all the interrupting in the first place? Are 
they mostly V.U.P.'s (Very Unimportant Persons)? It pays to 
find out. The first thing to do, if interruptions are a prob­
lem, is keep a log of all telephone calls and visitors. Mr. 
Jackson, the director of a non-profit foundation, kept such a 
log for a week. It showed whether these time-snatchers were 
scheduled, who they were, and what they wanted. When he 
reviewed the log he found that the 80/20 rule applied. Eighty 
percent of his interruptions were coming from 20 percent of 
the interrupters. And by far most of the interruptions were 
coming from two people: an assistant and another subordi­
nate. 
This kind of traffic is easy to regulate, as Til show you 
shortly. But even if your boss is in the habit of calling you 
into his office in the morning and wipes out your lovingly pol­
ished time plan by giving you an unexpected assignment that 
takes most of the day, you needn't commit harakiri. Try 
these ideas instead: 
89 
90 ALAN LAKE IN 
Encourage your boss to warn you about such tasks the day 
before, if at all possible, so that you may plan your time 
more realistically—not only for your benefit but for his. Is 
your boss (or client) giving unnecessary priority to tasks that 
could be adequately handled on a scheduled, non-rush basis, 
and might you point this out tactfully? 
It's also worth asking yourself whether your boss is in the 
habit of turning to you for this type of assignment because 
you have in effect trained him to do so. If so, try being a bit 
less available, or delegate others to handle it instead. The 
same goes for a demanding customer. If the situation war­
rants, you may benefit from encouraging him to call the 
service department or some other person instead of always 
depending on you. 
Mr. Jackson's case presented no great problem. He worked 
out a schedule with his assistant to see him at three scheduled 
times during the day: 9:30, 1:30, and 3:30. His assistant was 
to save all business for those times, except for the most urgent 
emergencies. The assistant had gotten into the habit of 
jumping up and rushing into Mr. Jackson's office like a fire­
man whenever anything came up. In the future he was never 
to interrupt Mr. Jackson unless convinced his mission was an 
A-item. 
The other subordinate presented a different problem. This 
man, Anderson, was insecure in his job. In order to function, 
he needed continual reassurance that he was doing everything 
right. He was constantly bothering Mr. Jackson with a 
stream of low-priority (vague, but urgent-sounding) matters 
that he pressured Mr. Jackson to do right away. Also, Ander­
son was overdependent and unable to make a decision on his 
own. He insisted on droning through all the details even when 
Mr. Jackson didn't need them to make a choice. 
On balance, though, Anderson had done good work, and 
Mr. Jackson had never panted to hurt his feelings by telling 
him to stop bugging him with trivia. Now Mr. Jackson de­
cided that Anderson's milquetoastish ways were a luxury he 
could no longer afford. Either Anderson would have to get 
along better on his own or he could be replaced by someone 
who didn't require so much of Mr. Jackson's time. Much as 
he liked Anderson, Jackson couldn't afford the time that he 
cost. Eventually Anderson was transferred to another depart-
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LD7E 91 
ment where he felt more secure, though the work was not as 
challenging. 
The log kept by Mr. Frank, another executive, revealed a 
different pattern. Every two minutes or so he was interrupted 
by one of his many staff members. His solution was to reorga­
nize, delegate more responsibility to his supervisors, and en­
courage his employees to look to the supervisors for answers 
to questions. He established weekly staff meetings, because 
his log revealed that several people were asking him for in­
formation requiring coordination with others. Mr. Frank also 
started sending background memos to the entire staff on 
routine matters, since lack of information was creating unnec­
essary interruptions of his work. 
When the Interrupter is a 
Four-Year-Old 
Ms. Jones didn't need a log to tell her that her day was 
being constantly interrupted by her four-year-old daughter, 
Melinda. When Ms. Jones wanted to find time to finish an ex­
citing novel, she went into the bedroom, closed the door, and 
began reading. Within two minutes Melinda was on 
Mommy's lap. Disappointed, Ms. Jones consoled herself with 
the thought that Melinda would grow up better-adjusted for 
having had her mother's attention in her formative years, and 
went back to dreaming of next year, when Melinda would 
start a half day of kindergarten and Mommy would have all 
that time to herself. 
Ms. Jones finally decided Melinda could be just as well-ad­
justed if she had her mother's wholehearted attention only 
some of the time instead of the half-hearted attention that is 
all any adult can muster when a child is watched without 
letup. After all, if Ms. Jones was in a better humor during 
her time with Melinda, she was sure to be a happier and 
more creative mother. 
One day she got the courage to put a latch on the bed­
room door, set the kitchen timer for thirty minutes, and told 
Melinda that she was going into her room to read for half an 
hour. She promised to play Fish when the timer bell went off. 
Melinda was to play in her room until it did. 
You can't imagine the wailing and screams that Melinda 
produced from her side of the bedroom door, but Ms. Jones 
92 ALAN LAKE IN 
steeled herself and kept the door closed. She didn't get any 
reading done that first day because she was too anxious about 
the effect her experiment would have on Melinda, but she set 
the time for thirty minutes at 10:30 each day that week. By 
the end of the week Melinda seemed to have adjusted to the 
new system and played quietly in her room while Ms. Jones 
not only finished her novel but was halfway through a second 
one. 
Contact Time vs. Thinking Time 
If your log reveals that 80 percent of your interruptions 
are from new and/or different people, you obviously can't 
solve the problem by talking to the key interrupters. If your 
job involves a great deal of public contact, you'd best answer 
the phone or see the caller. But if you usually perform two 
roles, one requiring public contact and the other thinking 
alone, then you need some way to balance the demands of 
the two roles so that the contact role doesn't interrupt the 
thinking role to death. 
Although he kept telling himself the new revision of his bill­
ing system was important, every time a visitor came his way 
Mr. Bean took time out to talk to him—even when it was a 
trivial matter that could have been handled by a subordinate. 
Mr. Bean knew that the system revision was the big A-l, 
and he felt bad each evening when he went home after spend­
ing little time on it. He blamed the constant interruptions. 
The truth was that Mr. Bean blew hot and cold on interrup­
tions. Sometimes he sought them out; at other times he resent­
ed even the important ones. When he was interrupted in the 
middle of an intricate part of the revision plan he was an­
noyed. Even if a very big customer was on the phone, Mr. 
Bean didn't think, "That's my job calling." Instead, he 
shrugged and fumed. "How can I get my work done?" 
Mr. Bean's solution to the problem of conflicting job func­
tions was to alternate between them, to the detriment of 
both. Was there a better way? 
Mr. Bean contemplnted not answering the phone and re­
fusing to see visitors. This would give him time to think, and 
the system revision would probably get done nicely. But then 
what were the risks in not being available?* He might offend 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 93 
other people who would want and expect to talk to him. His 
staff might fail to coordinate with him, and mix-ups might re­
sult. Morale might decline, because he might not learn of 
gripes and complaints until they had built to a crisis propor­
tion. 
What he did do was little better. He allowed anyone to see 
him any time. But rather than paying careful attention to 
their problems, he was often preoccupied with his own inter­
rupted one. He was nervous and tense about getting back to 
his work," and since he was too "busy" to listen carefully, he 
made visitors sorry they had ever come. 
Set Up Availability Hours 
I suggested that perhaps a better solution would be to 
create special "Availability Hours." We're all familiar with 
signs saying: "Salesmen seen only Tuesday and Thursday 
from 1-4" or "The Doctor sees patients only on Monday, 
Tuesday and Wednesday." Availability Hours are those hours 
during the week when you're available to associates or others 
without appointment. At such times visitors may walk 
through your "open door" and feel free to discuss business, 
assured that their viewpoint will receive undivided attention. 
Mr. Bean decided to set up Availability Hours from 8 to 
9:30 and again from 11 to 12 in the morning, leaving 9:30 
to 11 as Quiet Time. He instructed the switchboard operator 
to take all routine calls during his Quiet Time so that he 
could work without interruption. 
Quiet Time Can Backfire 
Luckily, Mr. Bean remembered the case of Mr. Kent, who 
unexpectedly and unilaterally decreed that absolutely no one 
was to disturb him during Quiet Time between 8 and noon. 
The results were catastrophic. His subordinates struggled on 
their own, and hence made many more mistakes. Morale 
dropped, and his failure to take note of this reduced it even 
further. For a time Mr. Kent received congratulations from 
his boss. He seemed to be doing the right thing. The bravos 
died down when the state of organizational decline was fully 
appreciated. Eventually Mr. Kent was fired—in effect, be-
94 ALAN LAKF.rN 
cause of his failure to balance Quiet Time and Availability 
Time. 
So Mr. Bean discussed his proposed new arrangement with 
his key people and made changes based on their suggestions. 
Several thought they would try a little experimenting on their 
own, because they had also felt the need to get their own 
work done without interruptions. Mr. Bean made sure that 
they would bring to his attention any fallout that his pro­
posed schedule might have on their jobs during the readjust­
ment period. 
How do you set aside Quiet Time and block out interrup­
tions? 
If you're a top executive, it's a cinch: just tell your secre­
tary to Lake all your calls, turn any emergencies over to your 
Executive Assistant, and close the door of your private office. 
If you don't have a secretary or switchboard operator to 
take your calls, you might tie up your telephone line a half 
hour a day by dialing your own number and leaving the 
phone off the hook so anyone calling you will get a busy sig­
nal. 
You also need to keep others from coming by to talk to 
you during your Quiet Time. 
Mr. Bean remained fair game for his colleagues so long as 
they saw that he was alone and therefore "not doing anything 
important.'' But then he told them about his idea of Quiet 
Time and put a sign on his desk that said "Quiet Time, please 
return at 11:30." Whenever someone approached him during 
Quiet Time, he pointed to the sign, asked whether the caller 
could wait until then, and made sure to get back to the inter­
rupter promptly at 11:30. 
When he was particularly in need of concentration, he 
looked around for an unused office or conference room. 
Sometimes he went to the public library. (A top executive 
confided to me that when he wanted Quiet Time he hid out 
in the back of a small coffee shop two blocks from his corpo­
ration's headquarters building.) 
How To Handle the Sociables 
Mr. Bean also found from his log that many people just 
stopped by to chat. He was on the main route to the water 
cooler and anyone running away from a difficult job back at 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OP YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 95 
his desk found him easy game for a few minutes of relaxing. 
He therefore shifted his desk to a different angle. Then he 
took away the extra visitor's chair, because he found that 
when two escapees got talking together at his desk it meant a 
minimum of twenty minutes' time wasted. Finally, he tried to 
keep his head down so that he didn't catch the eyes of pass-
ersby. 
The next problem Mr. Bean encountered was that he be­
came lonesome during Quiet Time. He was so accustomed to 
talking to people that he kept hoping someone would inter­
rupt him. Every time the phone rang, even though he knew 
his secretary would pick it up. he couldn't help wondering 
who was calling and what they wanted. Although it took a 
lot of willpower, he resisted the tendencies to pick up the 
phone himself or to jump up right afterward to get the mes­
sage. 
He found it difficult not to be helpful to whomever came 
his way, and though his secretary managed to keep many vis­
itors away, those in his own organization who ignored her 
and marched right into his office with "Do you have a min-
ute?"-type questions usually got his attention. 
Mr. Bean still found it difficult to say "no" to anyone. But 
when he tried it a few times, he was surprised: Nothing seri­
ous happened. He found that most of the interrupters were 
simply in the habit of coming in and really could wait until 
later—and so could his own need to have other people 
around. Gradually he became more firm. His tone indicated 
he was not angry with the interrupter, but he was insistent 
that the other person respect his Quiet Time. 
Alternating Quiet Time with Availability Hours worked 
well for Mr. Bean and it can work well for you too. 
13. ASK LAKEIN'S QUESTION 
YOUR LIFETIME GOALS STATEMENT, your To Do List, and 
your Schedule give you substantial control over the way you 
spend your time. Each of these is an extremely valuable plan­
ning tool. But they are not handy for the minute-to-minuto 
decisions you have to make. 
Who can take fifteen minutes to plan a dozen times a day? 
Nobody. You wouldn't get anything done. Which is why I'm 
going to hand you a new tool to use quickly and spontane­
ously as many times a day as you need it. It's called "ask 
Lakein's Question." Lake ins Question is: what is the best use 
of my time right now? 
At first you'll have to remind yourself to keep asking 
Lakein's Question whenever you're not positive whether 
you're using your time to best advantage. After a week or so 
it should become second nature to you. 
If your first answer when you ask Lakein's Question is *1 
don't know," then the best use of your time is to ask the 
question again. If you still get "I don't know," then tell your­
self: "I already know that; but I still need a better answer." 
I don't mean to turn this into some silly game of hide-
and-seek. I do suggest to you that if you really don't know 
the best use of your time, then there's nothing more impor­
tant than finding out. So do keep asking Lakein's Question 
until you get at least some sort of meaningful answer. 
As soon as you get the first answer, stop. 
Almost invariably, the first (and spontaneous) answer to 
Lakein's Question is the best, and you should accept it. But a 
mistake is always a possibility. So take just a moment to 
make your "go/no-go" decision. Your intuition may have 
taken the morning off. If you feel you can't act on your first 
answer, it's best to come up with an acceptable alternative at 
once. 
Like all new habits, asking Lakein's Question takes a bit of 
96 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 97 
practice. As you adopt this routine, you'll find that your con­
fidence increases, and that you come up consistently with 
good answers the first time around. 
Ask Lakem's Question All the Time! 
A particularly good time to ask Lakem's Question is when 
you have been interrupted by a visitor or telephone call (as­
suming that the interruption is desirable or necessary in the 
first place). When it's over, check whether you should go 
back to what you were doing or on to something new. 
Also ask Lakein's Question when you notice that you are 
becoming distracted. Are you listening to a conversation in 
the next office? Wondering who just walked down the hall? 
Daydreaming about next year's vacation? Pop the question! 
Also ask when you intuitively feel you may not be making 
the best use of your time. Or you detect a tendency to pro­
crastinate. Or when you pause momentarily in the middle of 
doing an A-l. Or when you find yourself shuffling paper 
rather than processing it. 
Ask it when you're torn between two different projects. 
When you run out of steam. Or at points where it seems 
natural to make the transition to something else. 
To help you remember to ask Lakein's Question, put up 
signs around you saying "What is the best use of my time 
now?" and "Ask Lakein's Question" printed on them. The 
signs can be as visible as you wish. How about a large sign 
directly across from where you normally sit? How about 
using them as posters all over the house? Or if you want the 
signs to be less conspicuous, how about in a drawer or in 
your private notebook? You might even get some stationery 
with the question printed on it. (I once had pencils made up 
for my clients with Lakein's Question inscribed on them.) 
Even if you know what the A-l is and have started it, you 
can still ask Lakein's Question, but be a little more specific: 
What is the best use of my time now on the A-l? What part 
shall I do, and how shall I do it?" 
Consider simplifying the task. Consider making it easier or 
faster. Should you phone or visit that slow-poke in the other 
department? Would it be better to write a letter to that 
long-winded customer so he doesn't gab on forever on the 
98 ALAN LAKE IN 
phone—or do you really need a give-and-take discussion with 
him to get a quick decision? 
A fast work place is also a strength. The ability to work 
very rapidly and perform well pays off, so check your work 
pace periodically by asking Lakein's Question. Maybe you're 
still hung up on last week's details. It happens. 
You can also waste time on items that were once A's—but 
are A's no longer. Is that big order likely to be canceled? Has 
the deadline changed? Is that difficult account executive 
about to get fired? A former A may decline in value to B and 
then CZ not only with the passing of time, but also with the 
degree of its completion. The 80/20 rule suggests that 80 per­
cent of the value is often gained during the first 20 percent 
of your work time on a certain task. Being a perfectionist 
may mean that you're working much too hard to get only 
minimum value. 
When Perfectionism Helps— 
and When It Doesn't 
Perfectionism is worth approaching when 80 percent of the 
value comes from the last 20 percent of the effort. For exam­
ple: the construction of a dam, bringing home the family's 
favorite groceries, unstopping a plugged-up sink, remember­
ing your wedding anniversary every year. 
Perfectionism is a waste of time on such labors as ironing 
every last wrinkle out of a sheet or re-checking a low-prior­
ity letter for typing errors. Once you get immersed in some 
activities, they seem to acquire a momentum of their own. 
You may then be carried along without control, drifting with 
the tide. 
One way to combat this drift is to set yourself control 
points for reviewing your progress. Check every fifteen min­
utes or half an hour—or go on until 3:30 and then review. 
One way to remember to do this is to use a kitchen timer. If 
you're not benefiting from continued effort, stop and change 
to do something else. 
You can also set the timer to help you meet deadlines. If 
you need to get something done in half an hour, set the timer 
accordingly. If you find the ticking annoying, put it in the 
bottom drawer; then you'll hear only the bell. Suppose the 
timer rings and you're still not finished? To protect yourself, 
HOW TO GET CONTROL OF YOUR TIME AND YOUR LIFE 99 
don't set the timer for thirty minutes; set it for twenty. Then 
you can re-set priorities after twenty minutes. Are you sure 
you're on the right track? You might want to set the timer 
for another fifteen minutes as a reminder that the project is 
probably not worth any more time. 
Do you suspect diminishing returns? Are you being need­
lessly perfectionistic? Ask Lakein's Question. If you're not 
sure whether it is worth finishing something (or worth contin­
uing), I suggest that you stop. If you don't come back to it, 
then in fact you were done. If you feel uncomfortable the 
next day about having stopped and you want to continue, go 
back to it But pretty soon . . . right! Ask Lakein's Question 
again.