4/23/2019 Kanban Quick Guide
https://www .tutorialspoint.com/cgi-bin/printpage.cgi 11/17Targetprocess
You can get more information on these tools at the respective sites. A comparison of these tools and some
more can be found at https://www.getapp.com/project-management-planning-software/ .
Kanban Tool
Kanban tool is a visual project management tool. Use Kanban cards, colors, swim-lanes, tags and due dates
to compose work on Kanban board. Analyze and constantly improve your process to increase business
efficiency.
Following are the important features of the Kanban tool −
Online Kanban Boards
Insightful analytics
Visual Project Management
Online Documents
Drag & Drop Tasks
To-Do Lists
For more information, visit the site http://kanbantool.com/
Kanbanery
Kanbanery is a visual project management tool that helps you work more effectively, alone and together, by
visualizing work.
Features of Kanbanery include −
GitHub integration
Create or copy task boards easily with templates
iPhone and iPad apps
API and several third party apps
Advanced reporting
Content-rich tasks
Work with existing systems
Real-time updates
For more information, visit the site, https://kanbanery.com/
LeanKit
LeanKit supports Kanban-based visual management. It can be used in distributed environment with access
to the CEO of a company, to all employees, customers, and partners.
Features of LeanKit include −
Visualize workflow using virtual Kanban boards.
Plan and track work using the workflow and calendar views.
Effective virtual and visual team collaboration.
Stay connected on-the-go with a browser or mobile device.
Align strategic initiatives with team-level execution using visual tiered board approach.
Measure effectiveness using powerful reporting and analytics.
4/23/2019 Kanban Quick Guide
https://www .tutorialspoint.com/cgi-bin/printpage.cgi 12/17Real-time updates and automated reports and notifications.
Cloud-hosted and supports calendar and workflow views.
Improve flow of work with Kanban capabilities such as policies, class of service, and WIP limits.
Role-based security controls.
Integrate with other systems such as Microsoft Project server, TFS, and VS online, GitHub, JIRA,
Buildmaster, Oracle Primavera, and so on. Zapier offers hundreds of pre-built integrations between
LeanKit and web apps, such as Google, Salesforce and Zendesk.
For more information, visit the site http://leankit.com/
JIRA Software
JIRA Software is an Agile project management tool designed for teams of every shape and size.
Features of JIRA software include −
Plan  − Flexible planning using Scrum or Kanban or a mixed methodology.
Accurate Estimations  − Estimations that help the team become more accurate and efficient. JIRA
supports user story points, hours, t-shirt sizes, or any other estimation technique.
Value-driven prioritization  − JIRA allows prioritization of user stories, issues, and bugs in the
product backlog with a simple drag and drop. This facilitates ensuring that the user stories of high
customer value to be on the top.
Track  − Team's work in full context is maintained with complete visibility irrespective of the
geographic locations.
Release  − Ship with confidence and sanity knowing that the information available is always
updated.
Report  − Improve team performance with actions based on real-time, visual data that gives the
team critical insight into their agile process.
Workflow  − Choose a workflow that matches the way the team works or that is an out-of-the-box
workflow.
Add-ons  − Enhance JIRA with add-ons such as portfolio for JIRA, Tempo Timesheets, Zephyr, and
over 800 other add-ons that can help to get the most out of JIRA software.
Integrate workflow with other tools  − Upgrade your workflow with Confluence, Bitbucket,
Bamboo, HipChat, and hundreds of other developer tools.
For more information, visit the site https://www.atlassian.com/software/jira
Earliz
Earliz is an online project management and monitoring software that supports smart project management
and collaboration.
Features of Earliz include −
Gantt / Agile  − For each new project, choose between a Gantt  or Agile  interface.
You can change this project method any time during your project.
Task Management  − Structure your project by listing the different steps  of your
project by dividing them into tasks.
Board  − Manage your project daily using the board. Based on the Kanban method, the board shows
the status of all the tasks and their assignment to the project participants.
Synchronization  − The content of your project is automatically synced between all connected
members.stepssprints
orstories
4/23/2019 Kanban Quick Guide
https://www .tutorialspoint.com/cgi-bin/printpage.cgi 13/17Notifications  − Notifications alert you of project updates.
Project Progression  − Monitor daily the progress of your projects, the velocity of the team, and
know at any time whether commitments are fulfilled.
Team Workload  − Visualize workloads of team members for each project and time period.
Time Spent  − Track and analyze participant timesheets for each project.
Custom Indicators  − Create indicators tailored to your needs and share them easily with
stakeholders.
Access Right Management  − For each report, you can easily specify which members of your
workspace are allowed to access it.
Newsfeed  − Follow all the news of your workspace, contacts, and projects.
Dashboard  − Get an immediate summary of what you planned for the day: meetings, tasks, and
project deadlines.
Chats and Discussion Forums  − Debate topics linked to your projects or workspace in
discussion forums and chats.
Document sharing  − Store your documents in the Earliz workspace and make them available to
team members.
Planning  − Create teams, assign them to projects and manage the planning of each participant.
Targetprocess
Targetprocess is a software tool to visualize and manage Agile projects with full and natural support for
Scrum, Kanban or a customized Agile method. With enhanced visualization functionality, Targetprocess
gives the visibility you need across the teams, projects, and the entire organization.
Features of Targetprocess include −
iOS and Android apps
High-level planning and tracking across the entire portfolio
Burndown, CFD, custom graphical reports
Release planning and Sprint planning
REST
Backlog story map view
Kanban, Scrum, SAFe
Graphical reports and dashboards
Custom views, cards, reports, dashboards
QA, bug tracking, test case management
Ideal for Agile testing and quality centered teams
Visibility of progress across multiple projects and teams
Visualization of project data
For more information, visit the site http://agile-project-management-tool.targetprocess.com/
KANBAN - TOOLS 2KANBAN - TOOLS 2
Several project management tools that follow Kanban approach are available. In this chapter, you can have
an overview of the following Kanban Tools −
Projectplace
4/23/2019 Kanban Quick Guide
https://www .tutorialspoint.com/cgi-bin/printpage.cgi 14/17Wrike
smartQ
Accelo Projects
Trello
Projectplace
Projectplace is a no-installation project management tool that provides comprehensive solution allowing
teams and organizations to plan, visualize, and keep track of their projects in real time.
Features of Projectplace include −
Securely store, share, version manage, discuss, review files.
Keep track of goals and scheduled work and set priorities.
Manage all issues on a Kanban board.
Share screen with up to 100 people regardless of location.
Available in 8 languages.
The Enterprise plan allows unlimited number of projects.
Create plans, organize work and track personal tasks.
Complete overview of how all your projects are performing.
All project management tools in one place.
Customized or predefined templates, e.g. Prince2.
Visibility of commitments and resource availability.
Simple user account provisioning.
Utilize lessons learned with project templates.
Compare actual time spent with original estimations.
Execute on your plan together with your team.
Project planning tools.
Kanban boards.
Task management.
Issue management.
Gantt tool.
Document management.
Desktop add-ons for document management.
Project management app for Android and iOS.
Project overview.
Communication tools.
Online meeting tool.
Meeting management.
Project management templates.
Project portfolio management.
Resource management tool.
Time management.
4/23/2019 Kanban Quick Guide
https://www .tutorialspoint.com/cgi-bin/printpage.cgi 15/17Report management.
Single Sign-On .
Industry leading security.
Customize your collaboration experience using our APIs.
For more information, visit the site https://www.projectplace.com/
Wrike
Wrike combines project management with a real-time workspace for collaboration, discussion and
document sharing.
Features of Wrike include −
Advanced task management.
Live dashboard project overview.
File sharing and editing.
Create subtasks.
Real-time activity stream.
Progress reports.
Task-related discussions.
Branded workspace.
Email-to-task syncing.
Branded e-mail notifications.
Automate recurring tasks and projects.
Third party integrations with Gmail, Google Drive, Dropbox, etc.
Project timeline view .
Workload view and scheduling.
Calendar integrations with Outlook, Google and iCalendar.
Time tracking.
Android and iPhone app.
Custom reports.
Add-ins for Google and Apple Mail.
Security and privacy.
Encryption.
Access control.
Data policy.
For more information, visit the site https://www.wrike.com/
smartQ
smartQ is an agile project management tool built around a visual task board . It allows
you to easily distribute work, track its progress and collaborate with the team online. smartQ can track
tasks, issues, tickets, i.e. it is customizable to fit any workflow.
Features of Wrike include −
Share notes and files.SSO
Ganttchart
KanbanBoard
4/23/2019 Kanban Quick Guide
https://www .tutorialspoint.com/cgi-bin/printpage.cgi 16/17Tickets by e-mail or form.
iPhone app.
Ticket form designer.
Threaded discussions and file attachments.
Project Performance Report.
External access for non-registered users.
Track tasks, issues, tickets.
Email notifications and private notes.
Mark tickets with three-color stars.
Customize your ticket fields.
Customize your workflow.
Unified notes and files area across all the tickets.
Board view, ticket view and list view.
Export tickets to CSV and Excel.
Customize project roles.
Team roles.
Assign people to each role.
For more information, visit the site http://www.getsmartq.com/
Accelo Projects
Accelo Projects is a Cloud Project Management Software that facilitates planning and tracking, automation
and change management.
Features of Accelo Projects include −
Project planning with Gantt charts.
Track milestones, tasks and budgets.
Powerful Gmail and Outlook/Office365 integrations.
Templates and reusable project plans.
Track time and expenses.
Forecasts, reports and dashboards.
Record notes, schedule meetings and calls.
Advanced approval for time.
Allocate time and resources.
Create invoices for all work planned or done.
Invoicing and payments.
Stripe and authorize .net integrations.
Custom fields and categories.
Custom project types and business processes.
Automatic e-mail attachment storage.
Smart and shared client database.
Client signoffs and approvals.
4/23/2019 Kanban Quick Guide
https://www .tutorialspoint.com/cgi-bin/printpage.cgi 17/17Client portal.
Task boards.
Calendar and task sync with Google Apps and Microsoft.
For more information, visit the site https://www.accelo.com/products/projects/
Trello
Trello is a project management software that utilizes the concept of boards to represent projects and within
boards, cards to represent tasks. Trello supports Team Collaboration enabling members to discuss a project
in real-time. It keeps everybody informed through task assignments, activity log, and e-mail notifications.
Features of Trello include −
Free or zero pricing for the basic service.
Quick overview on front and back of cards.
Easy organization with tags, labels and categories.
Drag and drop functionality.
In-line editing.
Checklists, with progress meter.
Easy uploading of files and attachments.
Data filtering.
Archiving of card records .
Deadline reminders.
E-mail notifications.
Activity log.
Assign tasks.
Voting feature.
Information retrieval and back-up.
SSL encryption of data.
Texts and visuals fit any screen size.
Search function.
Mobile functionality to access boards on-the-go.
Developer API.
For more information, visit the page https://trello.com/e.g.commentsandchanges