4/23/2019 Kanban Quick Guide
https://www .tutorialspoint.com/cgi-bin/printpage.cgi 5/17Focus on the tasks is ensured with a limit on work-in-progress .
The Pull approach enables resources to complete the tasks at hand before a new task is taken up.
Optimizing lead-time  results in faster delivery.
Visualization of the workflow with Kanban board draws immediate attention to any bottlenecks that
can be resolved immediately.
Empowerment of the team makes the team accountable for the success.
KANBAN - PROJECT MANAGEMENTKANBAN - PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Kanban is adapted to software development as a project management approach. Kanban in software
development supports a continuous workflow, termed as Value Stream.
Value Stream
The Value Stream consists of all actions required to bring a project from creation to completion.
The actions can −
Add Value to the project
Add no Value, but unavoidable
Add no Value, avoidable 
Elimination of Waste
Anything that does not add any value to the project is known as Waste. Kanban facilitates elimination of
waste.
In software development, there are three types of waste −
Waste in code development
Waste in project management
Waste in team potential
Waste in Code Development
Waste in code development is due to the following reasons −
Partially completed work  − The partially completed work can become outdated and unusable. It
can be eliminated with iterative cycles and with modular code that completes within the iteration.
Defects  − In developing a code, correction and retesting requires time and resources. It can be
eliminated with up-to-date test suite, completing testing within the iteration and continuous
customer feedback.
Waste in Project Management
Waste in project management is due to the following reasons −
Extra Processes  − Unnecessary documentation that requires time and resources. It can be
eliminated with −
Pre-planning of what processes are relevant and necessary.
Documentation review, that ensures relevant and necessary processes are followed.
Code Handoffs  − means passing the work from one person or team to another, after the first
person’s work is complete. It may give rise to lack of knowledge. It can be eliminated by keeping the
flowcharts and wireframes visible and clear.WIP
cycletime
termedaswaste
4/23/2019 Kanban Quick Guide
https://www .tutorialspoint.com/cgi-bin/printpage.cgi 6/17Extra Functions  − These are features that are not required by the customer. Effort and time are
wasted in developing the functions required to implement the features that the customer does not
want. It can be eliminated with continuous interaction with customer and testers involving in the
requirements gathering as they can better visualize the scenarios and expected behavior of the
system.
Waste in Team Potential
Waste in team potential is due to the following reasons −
Task Switching  − It leads to the danger of multi-tasking, which is a waste. It can be eliminated
with focus on a task with every release. Large process steps are segmented into tasks to −
Improve visibility
Reduce dependencies
Enable easy flow of work
Focus on the cycle-time of delivered work
Give a way to detect and resolve bottlenecks
Waiting  − Time for getting instructions or information – Team is subjected to sit idle if the
decisions are not made by the team, or if the information provided to the team 
 are expensive resources. It can be eliminated by allowing the team
members  to −
Take decisions so that they do not have to wait for instructions
Have access to information so that it can be used as and when required
KANBAN - AGILEKANBAN - AGILE
Agile Kanban is Agile Software Development with Kanban approach. In Agile Kanban, the Kanban board is
used to visualize the workflow. The Kanban board is normally put up on a wall in the project room. The
status and progress of the story development tasks is tracked visually on the Kanban board with flowing
Kanban cards.
Kanban Board
Kanban board is used to depict the flow of tasks across the value stream. The Kanban board −
Provides easy access to everyone involved in the project.
Facilitates communication as and when necessary.
Progress of the tasks are visually displayed.
Bottlenecks are visible as soon as they occur.
Advantages of Kanban board
The major advantages of using a Kanban board are −
Empowerment of Team  − This means −
Team is allowed to take decisions as and when required.
Team collaboratively resolves the bottlenecks.
Team has access to the relevant information.
Team continually communicates with customer.
Continuous Delivery  − This means −developers,testers,etc.
developers,testers,etc.
4/23/2019 Kanban Quick Guide
https://www .tutorialspoint.com/cgi-bin/printpage.cgi 7/17Focus on work completion.
Limited requirements at any point of time.
Focus on delivering value to the customer.
Emphasis on whole project.
The tasks and stories are represented by Kanban cards. The current status of each task is known by
displaying the cards in separate columns on the board. The columns are labeled as To Do, Doing , and
Done . Each task moves from To Do  to Doing  and then to Done .
Kanban Board is updated on a daily basis as the team progresses through the development.
WIP Limit
The label in the Doing column also contains a number, which represents the maximum number of tasks
that can be in that column at any point of time. i.e., the number associated with the Doing  column is the
WIP  Limit.
Pull Approach
Pull approach is used as and when a task is completed in the Doing column. Another card is pulled from the
To Do column.
Self-directing
In Agile Development, the team is responsible for planning, tracking, reporting and communicating in the
project. Team is allowed to make decisions and is accountable for the completion of the development and
product quality. This is aligned to the characteristic of empowerment of the team in Kanban.
Continuous Flow
In Agile development, there is no gate approach and the work flows across the different functions without
wait-time. This contributes in minimizing the cycle time characteristic of Kanban.
Visual Metrics
In Agile Kanban, the metrics are tracked visually using −
Kanban Board
Burndown Chart
Use s of Kanban board
Kanban Board is used to −
Measure the cycle times, that can be used to optimize average cycle time.
Track WIP limit to eliminate waste.
Track resource utilization to eliminate waste.
Use s of Burndown chart
Burndown chart is used to capture −
The current status of the tasks and stories.
The rate of progress of completing the remaining tasks.
As Kanban Board is updated daily, it contains all the information that is required by the Burndown charts.
KANBAN - LEAN AND AGILEKANBAN - LEAN AND AGILEWork−In−Progress
4/23/2019 Kanban Quick Guide
https://www .tutorialspoint.com/cgi-bin/printpage.cgi 8/17In Agile Kanban, the user stories are broken into tasks and Kanban cards are used to track the tasks on the
Kanban board. Agile Kanban has a concept of iteration that is not present in Kanban. Further, no processes
are considered.
Kanban in Value Stream
Kanban is defined to be executed in value stream with focus on delivery of value. Kanban in software
development can be visualized as the features flowing across the value stream. All the Kanban
characteristics  are met in the
Kanban approach for software development.
Feature Kanban Board
Feature Kanban Board is used to track the Feature Driven Development with Kanban Approach. Each
Feature is assigned to a particular release. The columns in the Kanban board represent releases. Hence,
each column contains all the features assigned to the release represented by it.
Each feature is broken into stories. Each release is broken into iterations. The iteration is executed in an
Agile Development approach. This can be treated as a sub-stream in the value stream, with the stories to be
completed within that iteration assigned to it.
Agile Kanban in Sub-stream
Agile Kanban approach is followed within each sub-stream that is implemented as an iteration. Each story
is broken into tasks in the iteration. Task Kanban board is used to track the status and progress of the story
development tasks. The current status of each task is known by displaying the cards in separate columns on
the board. The columns are labeled as To Do, Doing, and Done. Each task moves from To Do to Doing and
then to Done.
Continuous Delivery
Continuous delivery to the customer is ensured with features tracked on feature Kanban board and stories
representing features tracked on task Kanban board.
Delivery through a release is accomplished by −
Continuous tracking
Constant communication with the customer
Adjusting development plan as required
Focusing on delivery of value to the customer
Agile development as well as Kanban maintain team collaboration. This, in turn helps in identifying and
resolving Bottlenecks immediately as required by Kanban. This results in accomplishment of all the needed
tasks within the iteration to deliver quality product, which meets customer expectations.
Continuous Process Improvement
Kanban supports process improvements to enhance the delivery approach continuously.
Consider a requirement that is a change or addition to the product. In such a case, Kanban cards can be
used to visualize the requirement passing through the processes of analysis, design, development, product
integration and testing. This is different from the Waterfall approach in the sense that it does not require
completion of one process for all the requirements to flow to the next process in the sequence.
Such an implementation of Kanban in product maintenance allows maintainability, reliability and integrity
of the product. The required process improvements are gathered at regular intervals and implemented on a
continuous basis.
KANBAN - SCRUMKANBAN - SCRUMReferChapter−CharacteristicsofKanbaninthisTutorial
4/23/2019 Kanban Quick Guide
https://www .tutorialspoint.com/cgi-bin/printpage.cgi 9/17In this chapter, we will learn the similarities and differences between Kanban and Scrum. These similarities
and differences will help you in choosing the correct method for your project.
Kanban and Scrum - Similarities
Similarities between Kanban and Scrum are −
Both are Agile.
Both use pull scheduling.
Both limit WIP, Kanban at task level and Scrum at sprint level.
Both use transparency across the development.
Both focus on delivering releasable software early.
Both are based on self-organizing teams.
Both require breaking the work into pieces.
In both the methods, the release plan is continuously optimized based on empirical data 
.
Kanban and Scrum - Differences
The differences between Kanban and Scrum are as follows −
S.No Scrum Kanban
1 Scrum prescribes roles. In Kanban, roles are optional.
2 Product backlog is to be prioritized. Prioritization is optional.
3Sprints are to be time-boxed. You can choose
the length of the sprint, but once chosen, the
same length is to be maintained for all the
sprints.Time-boxed iterations are optional.
4 Scrum team needs to commit to a particular
amount of work for the sprint.Commitment is optional.
5 Cross-functional teams are prescribed. Cross-functional teams are optional.
Specialist teams are allowed.
6 Uses velocity as default metric for planning
and process improvement.Uses lead time  as default metric
for planning and process improvement.
7 Items such as stories, tests must be broken
down so that they can be completed within
one sprint.No particular item size is prescribed.
8Sprint backlog shows what tasks are to be
executed during the current sprint. These
tasks are displayed on Scrum board.
Scope of the sprint is fixed. WIP is limited
per unit of time .Tasks are defined at workflow level. WIP is
limited per workflow state.Scrum–Velocity,Kanban−LeadTime/CycleTime
cycletime
WIPlimitisthevelocity
4/23/2019 Kanban Quick Guide
https://www .tutorialspoint.com/cgi-bin/printpage.cgi 10/179 Additions/Changes cannot be done within a
sprint.Additions /changes can be done if WIP limit
is not crossed.
10 New Scrum board is set at the beginning of
every sprint.Kanban board is persistent.
11 Daily meetings need to be conducted. Daily meetings are optional.
12 Burn-down charts are prescribed. No particular chart is prescribed.
Kanban vs. Scrum
The following advantages can help you choose between Kanban and Scrum −
You need to choose Kanban if you already have working processes and you want to improve without
disturbing the whole system whereas you need to choose Scrum if you want to introduce a new
process in the organization.
You can use Kanban in the product development with Feature Driven Development to track the
workflows in the value stream whereas you can use Scrum for the development in each iteration.
You need to define the WIP Limits in Kanban explicitly whereas you need to define the sprint length
in scrum that imposes WIP limits implicitly.
Both Kanban and Scrum are adaptive but Scrum is more prescriptive than Kanban.
Kanban imposes only two Rules: Visualize workflow and limit WIP whereas Scrum imposes more
constraints such as time-boxed Sprints.
Kanban leads to organizational process improvements, both in management and development.
Kanban also supports maintenance activities. Scrum leads to high throughput in small development
teams. It does not contribute to product development and maintenance workflows that are longer in
duration with unpredictability on the size of work units and changes. Scrum does not emphasize on
optimizing management activities.
In Kanban, you can choose when to do planning, process improvement, and release. You can choose
to do these activities on a regular basis or on-demand. Scrum iteration is one single time-boxed
Sprint combining three different activities: planning, process improvement, and release 
.
Thus, Kanban and Scrum are effective tools in their specific contexts. You can combine Kanban and Scrum
to derive maximum benefits from both.
Adapting Kanban and Scrum Together
You can use Kanban and Scrum together by implementing those characteristics that will suit your needs.
The constraints of both need to be considered before adapting them. For instance, Scrum requires Time-
boxed Sprints and if you do away with those, you cannot say that you have implemented Scrum. Both give
you a basic set of constraints to drive your own process improvement.
KANBAN - TOOLS 1KANBAN - TOOLS 1
Several project management tools that follow Kanban approach are available. In this chapter, you can have
an overview of the following Kanban Tools −
Kanban Tool
Kanbanery
LeanKit
JIRA Software
Earlizifrequired