1
THE HABIT LOOP
How Habits Work
I.
In the fall of 1993, a man who would upend much of what we know 
about habits walked into a laboratory in San Diego for a scheduled appointment. He was elderly, a shade over six feet tall, and neatly dressed in a blue  button- down shirt. His thick white hair would have inspired envy at any ﬁ  ftieth high school reunion. Arthritis 
caused him to limp slightly as he paced the laboratory’s hallways, and he held his wife’s hand, walking slowly, as if unsure about what each new step would bring.
About a year earlier, Eugene Pauly, or “E.P.” as he would come to 
be known in medical literature, had been at home in Playa del Rey, preparing for dinner, when his wife mentioned that their son, Mi-chael, was coming over.
“Who’s Michael?” Eugene asked. “Your child,” said his wife, Beverly. “You know, the one we 
raised?”
Eugene looked at her blankly. “Who is that?” he asked.
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   3 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   3 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
4 ● THE POWER OF HABIT
The next day, Eugene started vomiting and writhing with stom-
ach cramps. Within  twenty- four hours, his dehydration was so pro-nounced that a panicked Beverly took him to the emergency room. His temperature started rising, hitting 105 degrees as he sweated a yellow halo of perspiration onto the hospital’s sheets. He became delirious, then violent, yelling and pushing when nurses tried to insert an IV into his arm. Only after sedation was a physician able to slide a long needle between two vertebra in the small of his back and extract a few drops of cerebrospinal ﬂ  uid.
The doctor performing the procedure sensed trouble immedi-
ately. The ﬂ  uid surrounding the brain and spinal nerves is a barrier 
against infection and injury. In healthy individuals, it is clear and quick ﬂ  owing, moving with an almost silky rush through a needle. 
The sample from Eugene’s spine was cloudy and dripped out slug-gishly, as if ﬁ  lled with microscopic grit. When the results came back 
from the laboratory, Eugene’s physicians learned why he was ill: He was suffering from viral encephalitis, a relatively common disease that produces cold sores, fever blisters, and mild infections on the skin. In rare cases, however, the virus can make its way into the brain, inﬂ  icting catastrophic damage as it chews through the deli-
cate folds of tissue where our thoughts,  dreams— and according to some,  souls— reside.
Eugene’s doctors told Beverly there was nothing they could do to 
counter the damage already done, but a large dose of antiviral drugs might prevent it from spreading. Eugene slipped into a coma and for ten days was close to death. Gradually, as the drugs fought the disease, his fever receded and the virus disappeared. When he ﬁ  -
nally awoke, he was weak and disoriented and couldn ’t swallow properly. He couldn ’t form sentences and would sometimes gasp, as if he had momentarily forgotten how to breathe. But he was alive.
Eventually, Eugene was well enough for a battery of tests. The 
doctors were amazed to ﬁ  nd that his  body— including his nervous 
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   4 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   4 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
The Habit Loop ● 5
 system— appeared largely unscathed. He could move his limbs and 
was responsive to noise and light. Scans of his head, though, re-vealed ominous shadows near the center of his brain. The virus had destroyed an oval of tissue close to where his cranium and spinal column met. “He might not be the person you remember,” one doc-tor warned Beverly. “You need to be ready if your husband is gone.”
Eugene was moved to a different wing of the hospital. Within a 
week, he was swallowing easily. Another week, and he started talk-ing normally, asking for  Jell- O and salt, ﬂ  ipping through television 
channels and complaining about boring soap operas. By the time he was discharged to a rehabilitation center ﬁ  ve weeks later, Eugene 
was walking down hallways and offering nurses unsolicited advice about their weekend plans.
“I don ’t think I’ve ever seen anyone come back like this,” a doctor 
told Beverly. “I don ’t want to raise your hopes, but this is amazing.”
Beverly, however, remained concerned. In the rehab hospital it 
became clear that the disease had changed her husband in unset-tling ways. Eugene couldn ’t remember which day of the week it was, for instance, or the names of his doctors and nurses, no matter how many times they introduced themselves. “Why do they keep asking me all these questions?” he asked Beverly one day after a physician left his room. When he ﬁ  nally returned home, things got even 
stranger. Eugene didn ’t seem to remember their friends. He had trouble following conversations. Some mornings, he would get out of bed, walk into the kitchen, cook himself bacon and eggs, then climb back under the covers and turn on the radio. Forty minutes later, he would do the same thing: get up, cook bacon and eggs, climb back into bed, and ﬁ  ddle with the radio. Then he would do it 
again.
Alarmed, Beverly reached out to specialists, including a re-
searcher at the University of California, San Diego, who specialized in memory loss. Which is how, on a sunny fall day, Beverly and Eu-
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   5 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   5 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
6 ● THE POWER OF HABIT
gene found themselves in a nondescript building on the university’s 
campus, holding hands as they walked slowly down a hallway. They were shown into a small exam room. Eugene began chatting with a young woman who was using a computer.
“Having been in electronics over the years, I’m amazed at all 
this,” he said, gesturing at the machine she was typing on. “When I was younger, that thing would have been in a couple of  six- foot racks and taken up this whole room.”
The woman continued pecking at the keyboard. Eugene chuck-
led.
“That is incredible,” he said. “ All those printed circuits and di-
odes and triodes. When I was in electronics, there would have been a couple of  six- foot racks holding that thing.”
A scientist entered the room and introduced himself. He asked 
Eugene how old he was.
“Oh, let’s see,  ﬁ  fty- nine or sixty?” Eugene replied. He was  seventy- 
one years old.
The scientist started typing on the computer. Eugene smiled and 
pointed at it. “That is really something,” he said. “You know, when I was in electronics there would have been a couple of  six- foot racks holding that thing!”
The scientist was  ﬁ  fty- two- year- old Larry Squire, a professor who 
had spent the past three decades studying the neuroanatomy of memory. His specialty was exploring how the brain stores events. His work with Eugene, however, would soon open a new world to him and hundreds of other researchers who have reshaped our un-derstanding of how habits function. Squire’s studies would show that even someone who can ’t remember his own age or almost any-thing else can develop habits that seem inconceivably  complex— until you realize that everyone relies on similar neurological processes every day. His and others’ research would help reveal the subcon-scious mechanisms that impact the countless choices that seem as 
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   6 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   6 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
The Habit Loop ● 7
if they’re the products of  well- reasoned thought, but actually are in-
ﬂ uenced by urges most of us barely recognize or understand.
By the time Squire met Eugene, he had already been studying 
images of his brain for weeks. The scans indicated that almost all the damage within Eugene’s skull was limited to a  ﬁ  ve- centimeter 
area near the center of his head. The virus had almost entirely de-stroyed his medial temporal lobe, a sliver of cells which scientists suspected was responsible for all sorts of cognitive tasks such as recall of the past and the regulation of some emotions. The com-pleteness of the destruction didn ’t surprise  Squire— viral encephali-tis consumes tissue with a ruthless, almost surgical, precision. What shocked him was how familiar the images seemed.
Thirty years earlier, as a PhD student at MIT, Squire had worked 
alongside a group studying a man known as “H.M.,” one of the most famous patients in medical history. When H.M.—his real name was Henry Molaison, but scientists shrouded his identity throughout his  life— was seven years old, he was hit by a bicycle and landed hard on his head. Soon afterward, he developed seizures and started blacking out. At sixteen, he had his ﬁ  rst grand mal seizure, 
the kind that affects the entire brain; soon, he was losing conscious-ness up to ten times a day.
By the time he turned  twenty- seven, H.M. was desperate. Anti-
convulsive drugs hadn ’t helped. He was smart, but couldn ’t hold a job. He still lived with his parents. H.M. wanted a normal existence. So he sought help from a physician whose tolerance for experimen-tation outweighed his fear of malpractice. Studies had suggested that an area of the brain called the hippocampus  might play a role in 
seizures. When the doctor proposed cutting into H.M.’s head, lift-ing up the front portion of his brain, and, with a small straw, suck-ing out the hippocampus  and some surrounding tissue from the 
interior of his skull, H.M. gave his consent.
The surgery occurred in 1953, and as H.M. healed, his seizures 
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   7 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   7 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
8 ● THE POWER OF HABIT
slowed. Almost immediately, however, it became clear that his brain 
had been radically altered. H.M. knew his name and that his mother was from Ireland. He could remember the 1929 stock market crash and news reports about the invasion of Normandy. But almost ev-erything that came  afterward— all the memories, experiences, and struggles from most of the decade before his  surgery— had been erased. When a doctor began testing H.M.’s memory by showing him playing cards and lists of numbers, he discovered that H.M. couldn ’t retain any new information for more than twenty seconds or so.
From the day of his surgery until his death in 2008, every person 
H.M. met, every song he heard, every room he entered, was a com-pletely fresh experience. His brain was frozen in time. Each day, he was befuddled by the fact that someone could change the television channel by pointing a black rectangle of plastic at the screen. He introduced himself to his doctors and nurses over and over, dozens of times each day.
“I loved learning about H.M., because memory seemed like such 
a tangible, exciting way to study the brain,” Squire told me. “I grew up in Ohio, and I can remember, in ﬁ  rst grade, my teacher handing 
everyone crayons, and I started mixing all the colors together to see if it would make black. Why have I kept that memory, but I can ’t re-member what my teacher looked like? Why does my brain decide that one memory is more important than another?”
When Squire received the images of Eugene’s brain, he marveled 
at how similar it seemed to H.M.’s. There were empty,  walnut- sized chunks in the middle of both their heads. Eugene’s  memory— just like H.M. ’s— had been removed.
As Squire began examining Eugene, though, he saw that this 
patient was different from H.M. in some profound ways. Whereas almost everyone knew within minutes of meeting H.M. that some-thing was amiss, Eugene could carry on conversations and perform tasks that wouldn ’t alert a casual observer that anything was wrong. 
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   8 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   8 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
The Habit Loop ● 9
The effects of H.M.’s surgery had been so debilitating that he was 
institutionalized for the remainder of his life. Eugene, on the other hand, lived at home with his wife. H.M. couldn ’t really carry on con-versations. Eugene, in contrast, had an amazing knack for guiding almost any discussion to a topic he was comfortable talking about at length, such as  satellites— he had worked as a technician for an aerospace  company— or the weather.
Squire started his exam of Eugene by asking him about his youth. 
Eugene talked about the town where he had grown up in central California, his time in the merchant marines, a trip he had taken to Australia as a young man. He could remember most of the events in his life that had occurred prior to about 1960. When Squire asked about later decades, Eugene politely changed the topic and said he had trouble recollecting some recent events.
Squire conducted a few intelligence tests and found that Eu-
gene’s intellect was still sharp for a man who couldn ’t remember the last three decades. What’s more, Eugene still had all the habits he had formed in his youth, so whenever Squire gave him a cup of water or complimented him on a particularly detailed answer, Eu-gene would thank him and offer a compliment in return. Whenever someone entered the room, Eugene would introduce himself and ask about their day.
But when Squire asked Eugene to memorize a string of numbers 
or describe the hallway outside the laboratory’s door, the doctor found his patient couldn ’t retain any new information for more than a minute or so. When someone showed Eugene photos of his grand-children, he had no idea who they were. When Squire asked if he remembered getting sick, Eugene said he had no recollection of his illness or the hospital stay. In fact, Eugene almost never recalled that he was suffering from amnesia. His mental image of himself didn ’t include memory loss, and since he couldn ’t remember the injury, he couldn ’t conceive of anything being wrong.
In the months after meeting Eugene, Squire conducted experi-
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   9 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   9 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
10 ● THE POWER OF HABIT
ments that tested the limits of his memory. By then, Eugene and 
Beverly had moved from Playa del Rey to San Diego to be closer to their daughter, and Squire often visited their home for his exams. One day, Squire asked Eugene to sketch a layout of his house. Eu-gene couldn ’t draw a rudimentary map showing where the kitchen or bedroom was located. “When you get out of bed in the morning, how do you leave your room?” Squire asked.
“You know,” Eugene said, “I’m not really sure.”Squire took notes on his laptop, and as the scientist typed, Eu-
gene became distracted. He glanced across the room and then stood up, walked into a hallway, and opened the door to the bathroom. A few minutes later, the toilet ﬂ  ushed, the faucet ran, and Eugene, 
wiping his hands on his pants, walked back into the living room and sat down again in his chair next to Squire. He waited patiently for the next question.
At the time, no one wondered how a man who couldn ’t draw a 
map of his home was able to ﬁ  nd the bathroom without hesitation. 
But that question, and others like it, would eventually lead to a trail of discoveries that has transformed our understanding of habits’ power. It would help spark a scientiﬁ  c revolution that today involves 
hundreds of researchers who are learning, for the ﬁ  rst time, to un-
derstand all the habits that inﬂ  uence our lives.
As Eugene sat at the table, he looked at Squire’s laptop.“That’s amazing,” he said, gesturing at the computer. “You know, 
when I was in electronics, there would have been a couple of  six- foot racks holding that thing.”
● ● ●
In the ﬁ  rst few weeks after they moved into their new house, Bev-
erly tried to take Eugene outside each day. The doctors had told her that it was important for him to get exercise, and if Eugene was in-side too long he drove Beverly crazy, asking her the same questions 
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   10 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   10 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
The Habit Loop ● 11
over and over in an endless loop. So each morning and afternoon, 
she took him on a walk around the block, always together and al-ways along the same route.
The doctors had warned Beverly that she would need to monitor 
Eugene constantly. If he ever got lost, they said, he would never be able to ﬁ  nd his way home. But one morning, while she was getting 
dressed, Eugene slipped out the front door. He had a tendency to wander from room to room, so it took her a while to notice he was gone. When she did, she became frantic. She ran outside and scanned the street. She couldn ’t see him. She went to the neighbors’ house and pounded on the windows. Their homes looked  similar— maybe Eugene had become confused and had gone inside? She ran to the door and rang the bell until someone answered. Eugene wasn ’t there. She sprinted back to the street, running up the block, screaming Eugene’s name. She was crying. What if he had wan-dered into trafﬁ  c? How would he tell anyone where he lived? She 
had been outside for ﬁ  fteen minutes already, looking everywhere. 
She ran home to call the police.
When she burst through the door, she found Eugene in the living 
room, sitting in front of the television watching the History Channel. Her tears confused him. He didn ’t remember leaving, he said, didn ’t know where he’d been, and couldn ’t understand why she was so upset. Then Beverly saw a pile of pinecones on the table, like the ones she’d seen in a neighbor’s yard down the street. She came closer and looked at Eugene’s hands. His ﬁ  ngers were sticky with sap. 
That’s when she realized that Eugene had gone for a walk by himself. He had wandered down the street and collected some souvenirs.
And he had found his way home.Soon, Eugene was going for walks every morning. Beverly tried 
to stop him, but it was pointless.
“Even if I told him to stay inside, he wouldn ’t remember a few 
minutes later,” she told me. “I followed him a few times to make sure he wouldn ’t get lost, but he always came back safely.” Some-
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   11 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   11 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
12 ● THE POWER OF HABIT
times he would return with pinecones or rocks. Once he came back 
with a wallet; another time with a puppy. He never remembered where they came from.
When Squire and his assistants heard about these walks, they 
started to suspect that something was happening inside Eugene’s head that didn ’t have anything to do with his conscious memory. They designed an experiment. One of Squire’s assistants visited the house one day and asked Eugene to draw a map of the block where he lived. He couldn ’t do it. How about where his house was located on the street, she asked. He doodled a bit, then forgot the assign-ment. She asked him to point out which doorway led to the kitchen. Eugene looked around the room. He didn ’t know, he said. She asked Eugene what he would do if he were hungry. He stood up, walked into the kitchen, opened a cabinet, and took down a jar of nuts.
  Later that week,   a visitor joined Eugene on his daily stroll. They 
walked for about ﬁ  fteen minutes through the perpetual spring of 
Southern California,   the scent of bougainvillea heavy in the air. Eu-gene didn ’t say much,   but he always led the way and seemed to know where he was going. He never asked for directions. As they rounded the corner near his house,   the visitor asked Eugene where he lived. “I don ’t know,   exactly,  ” he said. Then he walked up his sidewalk,   opened his front door,   went into the living room,   and turned on the television.
It was clear to Squire that Eugene was absorbing new informa-
tion. But where inside his brain was that information residing? How could someone ﬁ  nd a jar of nuts when he couldn ’t say where the 
kitchen was located? Or ﬁ  nd his way home when he had no idea 
which house was his? How, Squire wondered, were new behavioral patterns forming inside Eugene’s damaged brain?
II.
Within the building that houses the Brain and Cognitive Sciences department of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology are labora-
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   12 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   12 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
The Habit Loop ● 13
tories that contain what, to the casual observer, look like dollhouse 
versions of surgical theaters. There are tiny scalpels, small drills, and miniature saws less than a quarter inch wide attached to robotic arms. Even the operating tables are tiny, as if prepared for  child- sized surgeons. The rooms are always kept at a chilly sixty degrees be-cause a slight nip in the air steadies researchers’ ﬁ  ngers during del-
icate procedures. Inside these laboratories, neurologists cut into the skulls of anesthetized rats, implanting tiny sensors that can record the smallest changes inside their brains. When the rats wake, they hardly seem to notice that there are now dozens of microscopic wires arrayed, like neurological spider webs, inside their heads.
These laboratories have become the epicenter for a quiet revolu-
tion in the science of habit formation, and the experiments unfolding here explain how  Eugene— as well as you, me, and everyone  else— developed the behaviors necessary to make it through each day. The rats in these labs have illuminated the complexity that occurs inside our heads whenever we do something as mundane as brush our teeth or back the car out of the driveway. And for Squire, these laboratories helped explain how Eugene managed to learn new habits.
When the MIT researchers started working on habits in the 
 1990s— at about the same time that Eugene came down with his  fever— they were curious about a nub of neurological tissue known as the basal ganglia. If you picture the human brain as an onion, composed of layer upon layer of cells, then the outside  layers— those closest to  the scalp— are generally the most recent additions from an evolutionary perspective. When you dream up a new invention or laugh at a friend’s joke, it’s the outside parts of your brain at work. That’s where the most complex thinking occurs.
Deeper inside the brain and closer to the brain  stem— where the 
brain meets the spinal  column— are older, more primitive struc-tures. They control our automatic behaviors, such as breathing and swallowing, or the startle response we feel when someone leaps out from behind a bush. Toward the center of the skull is a golf ball–
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   13 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   13 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
14 ● THE POWER OF HABIT
sized lump of tissue that is similar to what you might ﬁ  nd inside the 
head of a ﬁ  sh, reptile, or mammal. This is the basal ganglia, an oval 
of cells that, for years, scientists didn ’t understand very well, except for suspicions that it played a role in diseases such as Parkinson ’s.
In the early 1990s, the MIT researchers began wondering if the 
basal ganglia might be integral to habits as well. They noticed that animals with injured basal ganglia suddenly developed problems with tasks such as learning how to run through mazes or remem-bering how to open food containers. They decided to experiment by employing new  micro- technologies that allowed them to observe, in minute detail, what was occurring within the heads of rats as they performed dozens of routines. In surgery, each rat had what looked like a small joystick and dozens of tiny wires inserted into its skull. Afterward, the animal was placed into a  T- shaped maze with choco-late at one end. 
The maze was structured so that each rat was positioned behind 
a partition that opened when a loud click sounded. Initially, when a rat heard the click and saw the partition disappear, it would usually wander up and down the center aisle, snifﬁ  ng in corners and 
scratching at walls. It appeared to smell the chocolate, but couldn ’t ﬁ gure out how to ﬁ  nd it. When it reached the top of the T, it often 
turned to the right, away from the chocolate, and then wandered left, sometimes pausing for no obvious reason. Eventually, most animals discovered the reward. But there was no discernible pattern 
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   14 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   14 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
The Habit Loop ● 15
in their meanderings. It seemed as if each rat was taking a leisurely, 
unthinking stroll.
The probes in the rats’ heads, however, told a different story. 
While each animal wandered through the maze, its  brain— and in particular, its basal  ganglia— worked furiously. Each time a rat sniffed the air or scratched a wall, its brain exploded with activity, as if analyzing each new scent, sight, and sound. The rat was process-ing information the entire time it meandered.
The scientists repeated their experiment, again and again, watch-
ing how each rat’s brain activity changed as it moved through the same route hundreds of times. A series of shifts slowly emerged. The rats stopped snifﬁ  ng corners and making wrong turns. Instead, 
they zipped through the maze faster and faster. And within their brains, something unexpected occurred: As each rat learned how to navigate the maze, its mental activity decreased . As the route became 
more and more automatic, each rat started thinking less and less.
It was as if the ﬁ  rst few times a rat explored the maze, its brain 
had to work at full power to make sense of all the new information. But after a few days of running the same route, the rat didn ’t need to scratch the walls or smell the air anymore, and so the brain activity associated with scratching and smelling ceased. It didn ’t need to choose which direction to turn, and so  decision- making centers of the brain went quiet. All it had to do was recall the quickest path to the chocolate. Within a week, even the brain structures related to memory had quieted. The rat had internalized how to sprint through the maze to such a degree that it hardly needed to think at all.
But that  internalization— run straight, hang a left, eat the 
 chocolate— relied upon the basal ganglia, the brain probes indi-cated. This tiny, ancient neurological structure seemed to take over as the rat ran faster and faster and its brain worked less and less. The basal ganglia was central to recalling patterns and acting on them. The basal ganglia, in other words, stored habits even while the rest of the brain went to sleep.
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   15 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   15 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
16 ● THE POWER OF HABIT
To see this capacity in action, consider this graph, which shows 
activity within a rat’s skull as it encounters the maze for the ﬁ  rst 
time. Initially, the brain is working hard the entire time:
After a week, once the route is familiar and the scurrying has 
become a habit, the rat’s brain settles down as it runs through the maze:Click
First 
SectionSecond
Section
Chocolate
Click
First 
SectionSecond
Section
Chocolate
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   16 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   16 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
The Habit Loop ● 17
This  process— in which the brain converts a sequence of actions 
into an automatic  routine— is known as “chunking,” and it’s at the root of how habits form. There are  dozens— if not  hundreds— of behavioral chunks that we rely on every day. Some are simple: You automatically put toothpaste on your toothbrush before sticking it in your mouth. Some, such as getting dressed or making the kids’ lunch, are a little more complex.
Others are so complicated that it’s remarkable a small bit of tis-
sue that evolved millions of years ago can turn them into habits at all. Take the act of backing your car out of the driveway. When you ﬁ rst learned to drive, the driveway required a major dose of concen-
tration, and for good reason: It involves opening the garage, unlock-ing the car door, adjusting the seat, inserting the key in the ignition, turning it clockwise, moving the rearview and side mirrors and checking for obstacles, putting your foot on the brake, moving the gearshift into reverse, removing your foot from the brake, mentally estimating the distance between the garage and the street while keeping the wheels aligned and monitoring for oncoming trafﬁ  c, 
calculating how reﬂ  ected images in the mirrors translate into actual 
distances between the bumper, the garbage cans, and the hedges, all while applying slight pressure to the gas pedal and brake, and, most likely, telling your passenger to please stop ﬁ  ddling with the radio.
Nowadays, however, you do all of that every time you pull onto 
the street with hardly any thought. The routine occurs by habit.
Millions of people perform this intricate ballet every morning, 
unthinkingly, because as soon as we pull out the car keys, our basal ganglia kicks in, identifying the habit we’ve stored in our brains re-lated to backing an automobile into the street. Once that habit starts unfolding, our gray matter is free to quiet itself or chase other thoughts, which is why we have enough mental capacity to realize that Jimmy forgot his lunchbox inside.
Habits, scientists say, emerge because the brain is constantly look-
ing for ways to save effort. Left to its own devices, the brain will try to 
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   17 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   17 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
18 ● THE POWER OF HABIT
make almost any routine into a habit, because habits allow our minds 
to ramp down more often. This  effort- saving instinct is a huge advan-tage. An efﬁ  cient brain requires less room, which makes for a smaller 
head, which makes childbirth easier and therefore causes fewer in-fant and mother deaths. An efﬁ  cient brain also allows us to stop 
thinking constantly about basic behaviors, such as walking and choosing what to eat, so we can devote mental energy to inventing spears, irrigation systems, and, eventually, airplanes and video games.
But conserving mental effort is tricky, because if our brains 
power down at the wrong moment, we might fail to notice some-thing important, such as a predator hiding in the bushes or a speed-ing car as we pull onto the street. So our basal ganglia have devised a clever system to determine when to let habits take over. It’s some-thing that happens whenever a chunk of behavior starts or ends.
To see how it works, look closely at the graph of the rat’s neuro-
logical habit again. Notice that brain activity spikes at the beginning of the maze, when the rat hears the click before the partition starts moving, and again at the end, when it ﬁ  nds the chocolate.
Those spikes are the brain ’s way of determining when to cede 
control to a habit, and which habit to use. From behind a partition, 
Click
First 
SectionSecond
Section
Chocolate
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   18 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   18 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
The Habit Loop ● 19
for instance, it’s difﬁ  cult for a rat to know if it’s inside a familiar 
maze or an unfamiliar cupboard with a cat lurking outside. To deal with this uncertainty, the brain spends a lot of effort at the begin-ning of a chunk of behavior looking for  something— a  cue— that offers a hint as to which habit to use. From behind a partition, if a rat hears a click, it knows to use the maze habit. If it hears a meow, it chooses a different pattern. At the end of the activity, when the reward appears, the brain shakes itself awake and makes sure every-thing unfolded as expected.
This process within our brains is a  three- step loop. First, there is 
a cue, a trigger that tells your brain to go into automatic mode and 
which habit to use. Then there is the routine,  which can be physical 
or mental or emotional. Finally, there is a reward,  which helps your 
brain ﬁ  gure out if this particular loop is worth remembering for the 
future:
Over time, this  loop— cue, routine, reward; cue, routine, 
 reward— becomes more and more automatic. The cue and reward become intertwined until a powerful sense of anticipation and crav-ing emerges. Eventually, whether in a chilly MIT laboratory or your driveway, a habit is born.
● ● ●Routine
Reward
THE HABIT LOOPCue
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   19 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   19 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
20 ● THE POWER OF HABIT
Habits aren ’t destiny. As the next two chapters explain, habits can be 
ignored, changed, or replaced. But the reason the discovery of the habit loop is so important is that it reveals a basic truth: When a habit emerges, the brain stops fully participating in decision mak-ing. It stops working so hard, or diverts focus to other tasks. Unless you deliberately ﬁ ght a  habit— unless you ﬁ  nd new  routines— the 
pattern will unfold automatically.
However, simply understanding how habits  work— learning the 
structure of the habit  loop— makes them easier to control. Once you break a habit into its components, you can ﬁ  ddle with the gears.
“We’ve done experiments where we trained rats to run down a 
maze until it was a habit, and then we extinguished the habit by changing the placement of the reward,” Ann Graybiel, a scientist at MIT who oversaw many of the basal ganglia experiments, told me. “One day, we’ll put the reward in the old place, and put in the rat, and, by golly, the old habit will reemerge right away. Habits never really disappear. They’re encoded into the structures of our brain, and that’s a huge advantage for us, because it would be awful if we had to relearn how to drive after every vacation. The problem is that your brain can ’t tell the difference between bad and good habits, and so if you have a bad one, it’s always lurking there, waiting for the right cues and rewards.”
This explains why it’s so hard to create exercise habits, for in-
stance, or change what we eat. Once we develop a routine of sitting on the couch, rather than running, or snacking whenever we pass a doughnut box, those patterns always remain inside our heads. By the same rule, though, if we learn to create new neurological rou-tines that overpower those  behaviors— if we take control of the habit  loop— we can force those bad tendencies into the background, just as Lisa Allen did after her Cairo trip. And once someone creates a new pattern, studies have demonstrated, going for a jog or ignoring the doughnuts becomes as automatic as any other habit.
Without habit loops, our brains would shut down, overwhelmed 
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   20 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   20 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
The Habit Loop ● 21
by the minutiae of daily life. People whose basal ganglia are dam-
aged by injury or disease often become mentally paralyzed. They have trouble performing basic activities, such as opening a door or deciding what to eat. They lose the ability to ignore insigniﬁ  cant 
 details— one study, for example, found that patients with basal gan-glia injuries couldn ’t recognize facial expressions, including fear and disgust, because they were perpetually uncertain about which part of the face to focus on. Without our basal ganglia, we lose ac-cess to the hundreds of habits we rely on every day. Did you pause this morning to decide whether to tie your left or right shoe ﬁ  rst? 
Did you have trouble ﬁ  guring out if you should brush your teeth 
before or after you showered?
Of course not. Those decisions are habitual, effortless. As long as 
your basal ganglia is intact and the cues remain constant, the behav-iors will occur unthinkingly. (Though when you go on vacation, you may get dressed in different ways or brush your teeth at a different point in your morning routine without noticing it.)
At the same time, however, the brain ’s dependence on automatic 
routines can be dangerous. Habits are often as much a curse as a beneﬁ  t.
Take Eugene, for instance. Habits gave him his life back after he 
lost his memory. Then they took everything away again.
III.
As Larry Squire, the memory specialist, spent more and more time with Eugene, he became convinced his patient was somehow learn-ing new behaviors. Images of Eugene’s brain showed that his basal ganglia had escaped injury from the viral encephalitis. Was it pos-sible, the scientist wondered, that Eugene, even with severe brain damage, could still use the  cue- routine- reward loop? Could this an-cient neurological process explain how Eugene was able to walk around the block and ﬁ  nd the jar of nuts in the kitchen?
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   21 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   21 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
22 ● THE POWER OF HABIT
To test if Eugene was forming new habits, Squire devised an ex-
periment. He took sixteen different  objects— bits of plastic and brightly colored pieces of  toys— and glued them to cardboard rect-angles. He then divided them into eight pairs: choice A and choice B. In each pairing, one piece of cardboard, chosen at random, had a sticker placed on the bottom that read “correct.”
Eugene was seated at a table, given a pair of objects, and asked to 
choose one. Next, he was told to turn over his choice to see if there was a “correct” sticker underneath. This is a common way to mea-sure memory. Since there are only sixteen objects, and they are al-ways presented in the same eight pairings, most people can memorize which item is “correct” after a few rounds. Monkeys can memorize all the “correct” items after eight to ten days.
Eugene couldn ’t remember any of the “correct” items, no matter 
how many times he did the test. He repeated the experiment twice a week for months, looking at forty pairings each day.
“Do you know why you are here today?” a researcher asked at the 
beginning of one session a few weeks into the experiment.
“I don ’t think so,” Eugene said.“I’m going to show you some objects. Do you know why?”“ Am I supposed to describe them to you, or tell you what they are 
used for?” Eugene couldn ’t recollect the previous sessions at all.
But as the weeks passed, Eugene’s performance improved. After 
 twenty- eight days of training, Eugene was choosing the “correct” ob-ject 85 percent of the time. At  thirty- six days, he was right 95 percent of the time. After one test, Eugene looked at the researcher, bewil-dered by his success.
“How am I doing this?” he asked her.“Tell me what is going on in your head,” the researcher said. “Do 
you say to yourself, ‘I remember seeing that one’?”
“No,” Eugene said. “It’s here somehow or another”—he pointed 
to his head—“and the hand goes for it.”
To Squire, however, it made perfect sense. Eugene was exposed 
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   22 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   22 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
The Habit Loop ● 23
to a cue: a pair of objects always presented in the same combination. 
There was a routine: He would choose one object and look to see if there was a sticker underneath, even if he had no idea why he felt compelled to turn the cardboard over. Then there was a reward: the satisfaction he received after ﬁ  nding a sticker proclaiming “correct.” 
Eventually, a habit loop emerged.
To make sure this pattern was, in fact, a habit, Squire conducted 
one more experiment. He took all sixteen items and put them in front of Eugene at the same time. He asked him to put all the “cor-rect” objects into one pile.
Eugene had no idea where to begin. “Gosh sakes, how to remem-
ber this?” he asked. He reached for one object and started to turn it over. The experimenter stopped him. No, she explained. The task was to put the items in piles. Why was he trying to turn them over?
“That’s just a habit, I think,” he said.He couldn ’t do it. The objects, when presented outside of the 
context of the habit loop, made no sense to him.
Here was the proof Squire was looking for. The experiments 
demonstrated that Eugene had the ability to form new habits, even when they involved tasks or objects he couldn ’t remember for more than a few seconds. This explained how Eugene managed to go for a walk every morning. The  cues— certain trees on corners or the placement of particular  mailboxes— were consistent every time he Routine
Reward
EUGENE’S HABIT LOOPCue
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   23 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   23 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
24 ● THE POWER OF HABIT
went outside, so though he couldn ’t recognize his house, his habits 
always guided him back to his front door. It also explained why Eu-gene would eat breakfast three or four times a day, even if he wasn ’t hungry. As long as the right cues were  present— such as his radio or the morning light through his  windows— he automatically followed the script dictated by his basal ganglia.
What’s more, there were dozens of other habits in Eugene’s life 
that no one noticed until they started looking for them. Eugene’s daughter, for instance, would often stop by his house to say hello. She would talk to her father in the living room for a bit, then go into the kitchen to visit with her mother, and then leave, waving  good- bye on her way out the door. Eugene, who had forgotten their earlier conversation by the time she left, would get  angry— why was she leaving without chatting?—and then forget why he was upset. But the emotional habit had already started, and so his anger would per-sist, red hot and beyond his understanding, until it burned itself out.
“Sometimes he would bang the table or curse, and if you asked 
him why, he’d say ‘I don ’t know, but I’m mad!’” Beverly told me. He would kick his chair, or snap at whoever came into the room. Then, a few minutes later, he would smile and talk about the weather. “It was like, once it started, he had to ﬁ  nish the frustration,” she said.
Squire’s new experiment also showed something else: that hab-
its are surprisingly delicate. If Eugene’s cues changed the slightest bit, his habits fell apart. The few times he walked around the block, for instance, and something was  different— the city was doing street repairs or a windstorm had blown branches all over the  sidewalk— Eugene would get lost, no matter how close he was to home, until a kind neighbor showed him the way to his door. If his daughter stopped to chat with him for ten seconds before she walked out, his anger habit never emerged.
Squire’s experiments with Eugene revolutionized the scientiﬁ  c 
community’s understanding of how the brain works by proving, once and for all, that it’s possible to learn and make unconscious 
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   24 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   24 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
The Habit Loop ● 25
choices without remembering anything about the lesson or decision 
making. Eugene showed that habits, as much as memory and rea-son, are at the root of how we behave. We might not remember the experiences that create our habits, but once they are lodged within our brains they inﬂ  uence how we  act— often without our realization.
● ● ●
Since Squire’s ﬁ  rst paper on Eugene’s habits was published, the sci-
ence of habit formation has exploded into a major ﬁ  eld of study. 
Researchers at Duke, Harvard, UCLA, Yale, USC, Princeton, the University of Pennsylvania, and at schools in the United Kingdom, Germany, and the Netherlands, as well as corporate scientists work-ing for Procter & Gamble, Microsoft, Google, and hundreds of other companies are focused on understanding the neurology and psy-chology of habits, their strengths and weaknesses, and why they emerge and how they can be changed.
Researchers have learned that cues can be almost anything, from 
a visual trigger such as a candy bar or a television commercial to a certain place, a time of day, an emotion, a sequence of thoughts, or the company of particular people. Routines can be incredibly com-plex or fantastically simple (some habits, such as those related to emotions, are measured in milliseconds). Rewards can range from food or drugs that cause physical sensations, to emotional payoffs, such as the feelings of pride that accompany praise or  self- congratulation.
And in almost every experiment, researchers have seen echoes of 
Squire’s discoveries with Eugene: Habits are powerful, but delicate. They can emerge outside our consciousness, or can be deliberately designed. They often occur without our permission, but can be re-shaped by ﬁ  ddling with their parts. They shape our lives far more 
than we  realize— they are so strong, in fact, that they cause our brains to cling to them at the exclusion of all else, including common sense.
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   25 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   25 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
26 ● THE POWER OF HABIT
In one set of experiments, for example, researchers afﬁ  liated 
with the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism trained mice to press levers in response to certain cues until the behavior became a habit. The mice were always rewarded with food. Then, the scientists poisoned the food so that it made the animals violently ill, or electriﬁ  ed the ﬂ  oor, so that when the mice walked toward their 
reward they received a shock. The mice knew the food and cage were  dangerous— when they were offered the poisoned pellets in a bowl or saw the electriﬁ  ed ﬂ oor panels, they stayed away. When they 
saw their old cues, however, they unthinkingly pressed the lever and ate the food, or they walked across the ﬂ  oor, even as they vomited or 
jumped from the electricity. The habit was so ingrained the mice couldn ’t stop themselves.
It’s not hard to ﬁ  nd an analog in the human world. Consider fast 
food, for instance. It makes  sense— when the kids are starving and you’re driving home after a long  day— to stop, just this once, at McDon ald’s or Burger King. The meals are inexpensive. It tastes so 
good. After all, one dose of processed meat, salty fries, and sugary soda poses a relatively small health risk, right? It’s not like you do it all the time.
But habits emerge without our permission. Studies indicate that 
families usually don ’t intend to eat fast food on a regular basis. What 
happens is that a  once a month pattern slowly becomes once a week, and then twice a  week— as the cues and rewards create a  habit— until the kids are consuming an unhealthy amount of hamburgers and fries. When researchers at the University of North Texas and Yale tried to understand why families gradually increased their fast food consumption, they found a series of cues and rewards that most customers never knew were inﬂ  uencing their behaviors. They dis-
covered the habit loop.
Every McDonald’s, for instance, looks the  same— the company 
deliberately tries to standardize stores’ architecture and what em-ployees say to customers, so everything is a consistent cue to trigger 
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   26 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   26 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
The Habit Loop ● 27
purchasing routines. The foods at some chains are speciﬁ  cally engi-
neered to deliver immediate  rewards— the fries, for instance, are designed to begin disintegrating the moment they hit your tongue, in order to deliver a hit of salt and grease as fast as possible, causing your pleasure centers to light up and your brain to lock in the pat-tern. All the better for tightening the habit loop.
However, even these habits are delicate. When a fast food restau-
rant closes down, the families that previously ate there will often start having dinner at home, rather than seek out an alternative loca-tion. Even small shifts can end the pattern. But since we often don ’t recognize these habit loops as they grow, we are blind to our ability to control them. By learning to observe the cues and rewards, though, we can change the routines.
IV.
By 2000, seven years after Eugene’s illness, his life had achieved a kind of equilibrium. He went for a walk every morning. He ate what he wanted, sometimes ﬁ  ve or six times a day. His wife knew that as 
long as the television was tuned to the History Channel, Eugene would settle into his plush chair and watch it regardless of whether it was airing reruns or new programs. He couldn ’t tell the differ-ence.
As he got older, however, Eugene’s habits started impacting his 
life in negative ways. He was sedentary, sometimes watching televi-sion for hours at a time because he never grew bored with the shows. His physicians became worried about his heart. The doctors told Beverly to keep him on a strict diet of healthy foods. She tried, but it was difﬁ  cult to inﬂ  uence how frequently he ate or what he con-
sumed. He never recalled her admonitions. Even if the refrigerator was stocked with fruits and vegetables, Eugene would root around until he found the bacon and eggs. That was his routine. And as Eugene aged and his bones became more brittle, the doctors said he 
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   27 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   27 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
28 ● THE POWER OF HABIT
needed to be more careful walking around. In his mind, however, 
Eugene was twenty years younger. He never remembered to step carefully.
“ All my life I was fascinated by memory,” Squire told me. “Then 
I met E.P., and saw how rich life can be even if you can ’t remember it. The brain has this amazing ability to ﬁ  nd happiness even when 
the memories of it are gone.
“It’s hard to turn that off, though, which ultimately worked 
against him.”
Beverly tried to use her understanding of habits to help Eugene 
avoid problems as he aged. She discovered that she could  short- circuit some of his worst patterns by inserting new cues. If she didn ’t keep bacon in the fridge, Eugene wouldn ’t eat multiple, unhealthy break-fasts. When she put a salad next to his chair, he would sometimes pick at it, and as the meal became a habit, he stopped searching the kitchen for treats. His diet gradually improved.
Despite these efforts, however, Eugene’s health still declined. 
One spring day, Eugene was watching television when he suddenly shouted. Beverly ran in and saw him clutching his chest. She called an ambulance. At the hospital, they diagnosed a minor heart attack. By then the pain had passed and Eugene was ﬁ  ghting to get off his 
gurney. That night, he kept pulling off the monitors attached to his chest so he could roll over and sleep. Alarms would blare and nurses would rush in. They tried to get him to quit ﬁ  ddling with the sen-
sors by taping the leads in place and telling him they would use re-straints if he continued fussing. Nothing worked. He forgot the threats as soon as they were issued.
Then his daughter told a nurse to try complimenting him on his 
willingness to sit still, and to repeat the compliment, over and over, each time she saw him. “We wanted to, you know, get his pride in-volved,” his daughter, Carol Rayes, told me. “We’d say, ‘Oh, Dad, you’re really doing something important for science by keeping these doodads in place.’” The nurses started to dote on him. He 
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   28 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   28 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
The Habit Loop ● 29
loved it. After a couple of days, he did whatever they asked. Eugene 
returned home a week later.
Then, in the fall of 2008, while walking through his living room, 
Eugene tripped on a ledge near the ﬁ  replace, fell, and broke his hip. 
At the hospital, Squire and his team worried that he would have panic attacks because he wouldn ’t know where he was. So they left notes by his bedside explaining what had happened and posted pho-tos of his children on the walls. His wife and kids came every day.
Eugene, however, never grew worried. He never asked why he 
was in the hospital. “He seemed at peace with all the uncertainty by that point,” said Squire. “It had been ﬁ  fteen years since he had lost 
his memory. It was as if part of his brain knew there were some things he would never understand and was okay with that.”
Beverly came to the hospital every day. “I spent a long time talk-
ing to him,” she said. “I told him that I loved him, and about our kids and what a good life we had. I pointed to the pictures and talked about how much he was adored. We were married for  ﬁ  fty- seven 
years, and  forty- two of those were a real, normal marriage. Some-times it was hard, because I wanted my old husband back so much. But at least I knew he was happy.”
A few weeks later, his daughter came to visit. “What’s the plan?” 
Eugene asked when she arrived. She took him outside in a wheel-chair, onto the hospital’s lawn. “It’s a beautiful day,” Eugene said. “Pretty nice weather, huh?” She told him about her kids and they played with a dog. She thought he might be able to come home soon. The sun was going down. She started to get ready to take him inside.
Eugene looked at her.“I’m lucky to have a daughter like you,” he said. She was caught 
 off- guard. She couldn ’t remember the last time he had said some-thing so sweet.
“I’m lucky that you’re my dad,” she told him.“Gosh, it’s a beautiful day,” he said. “What do you think about 
the weather?”
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   29 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   29 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM
30 ● THE POWER OF HABIT
That night, at one o’clock in the morning, Beverly’s phone rang. 
The doctor said Eugene had suffered a massive heart attack and the staff had done everything possible, but hadn ’t been able to revive him. He was gone. After his death, he would be celebrated by re-searchers, with images of his brain studied in hundreds of labs and medical schools.
“I know he would have been really proud to know how much he 
contributed to science,” Beverly told me. “He told me once, pretty soon after we got married, that he wanted to do something impor-tant with his life, something that mattered. And he did. He just never remembered any of it.”
Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   30 Duhi_9781400069286_2p_all_r1.j.indd   30 10/17/11   12:01 PM 10/17/11   12:01 PM