Performance Appraisal Planning 2016 -2017    SMART Goals: A How to  Guide  
 
 
7 
 This doesn’t have to be a daunti ng experience; in fact, it should be quite illuminating. Below we 
demonstrate how to write S.M.A.R.T. goals for two typical business scenarios: completing a 
project and improving personal performance. We’ve also created an easy -to-use S.M.A.R.T. 
goals temp late and workshe et to help you get started.    
 
Examples of Creating a SMART Goal  
Here are two examples of initial goals we'll use to walk through this process:  
1. I want to complete a project  
2. I want to improve my performance  
   
This is a typical approach to creating goals, but both of these are very vague. With the current 
wording, the goals probably aren’t going to be attainable. The statements lack specifics, 
timelines, motivation, and a reality check.   
Now, let’s use the S.M.A.R.T. goals formula to clarify  both and create new and improved goals.  
 
 
Goal: I want to complete a project  
 Specific:  Many people are accessing our current site from their mobile devices. Since it’s 
not a responsive site, it provides a poor experience for customers. I want to launch a  
mobile app for my company website by the end of June , which requires involvement 
from software development, design, and marketing.  
 Measurable : Creating a mobile app for our company site will require a lot of resources. 
To make it worthwhile, I’d like to h ave 50,000 installs of the site within six months of 
launch. I’d also like to show a 5% conversion rate from customers using the mobile site.  
 Achievable : The departments that will be involved have signed -off on creating a mobile 
app. I’ll need to manage th e project and set milestones to keep everyone motivated and 
on target.  
 Relevant : Improving the customer experience on mobile devices is a core initiative for 
my company this year.  
 Time -Bound : In order to achieve 50,000 mobile app installs and a 5% conversi on rate by 
the end of the fiscal year, the app will need to be launched by Q2 with a robust 
marketing campaign that should continue through the end of the year.  
Performance Appraisal Planning 2016 -2017    SMART Goals: A How to  Guide  
 
 
8 
  
Goal: I want to improve my performance  
 Specific : I received low marks on my ability to use PowerPoint at my last performance 
review. Improving my skills requires that I learn how to use PowerPoint efficiently and 
practice using it by creating various presentations. I’d like to be more proficient using 
PowerPoint in time for my next review in six  months.  
 Measurable : By the time of my next review, I should be able to create presentations 
that incorporate graphs, images, and other media in a couple of hours. I should also be 
able to efficiently use and create templates in PowerPoint that my coworker s can also 
use.  
 Achievable : Improving my PowerPoint skills is instrumental in moving forward in my 
career and receiving a better performance review. I can set time aside every week to 
watch PowerPoint tutorials and even enroll in an online class that can teach me new 
skills. I can also ask coworkers and my manager for PowerPoint tips.  
 Relevant : Working with PowerPoint is currently 25% of my job. As I move up in the 
company, I’ll need to spend 50% of my time creating PowerPoint presentations. I enjoy 
my car eer and want to continue to grow within this company.  
 Time -Bound : In six months, I should be proficient in PowerPoint ensuring it only 
occupies 25% of my workload instead of the nearly 40% of the time it occupies now.  
   
 
Once you go through and write your  goals according to each S.M.A.R.T. characteristic, you can 
then combine and consolidate all the work you’ve done into one S.M.A.R.T. goal.  
   
 
S.M.A.R.T. goal: I want to complete a project  
 Description : Improving the customer experience on mobile devices is a core initiative 
for my company this year, so we are going to create a mobile app. By the end of the 
fiscal year, there should be 50,000 installs of the mobile app we develop, and it should 
produce a 5% conversion rate. We’ll build the mobile app in -house and launch it by the 
end of June  with an app -related marketing campaign that will continue to the end of the 
year.  
 Milestone : Mobile app launches end of June . 
Performance Appraisal Planning 2016 -2017    SMART Goals: A How to  Guide  
 
 
9 
  Deadline : End of the fiscal year.  
   
 
S.M.A.R.T. goal: I want to improve my performance  
 Description : To grow in my career, I need to improve my PowerPoint skills. By taking 
online classes and reviewing tutorials, I’ll improve my PowerPoint skills so that it only 
requires 25% of my work time.  
 Milestone : Complete an online PowerPoint course in three months.  
 Deadline : Next employee review in six months.