Performance Appraisal Planning 2016 -2017    SMART Goals: A How to  Guide  
 
 
3 
 How to Write SMART Goals:  
A Guide for Managers  and Employees  
 
 
What are SMART Goals?  
 Statements of the important results you are working to accomplish  
 Designed in a way to foster clear and mutual understanding of what constitutes 
expected levels of performance and successful professional development  
 
What is the SMART criteria?  
 
S Specific  What will be accomplished? What actions  will you 
take?  
M Measurable  What data will measure the goal? (How much? How 
well?  
A Achievable  Is the goal doable?  Do you have the necessary skills 
and resources?  
R Relevant  How does the goal align with broader goals? Why is 
the result important?  
T Time -Bound  What is the time frame for accomplishing the goal?  
 
How do I decide the right scope for my SMART Goals?  (How big? How many?)  
 
SMART goals are meant to address all of your major job responsibilities.  
Remember, goals are intended to focus attention and resources on what is most important 
so that you can be successful in achieving your priorities. SMART Goals are goals for your 
day-to-day job.  
 
 Common types of goals are to:  
o Increase something  
o Make something  
o Improve something  
o Reduce something  
o Save something  
o Develop someone  (yourself!)  
 
Where to start?  
1. Start by thinking about your whole job and the broad areas (or “buckets”) of 
responsibility and results for which you are accountable.  
2. Develop a  goal statement for each bucket.   To get the scope right, remember to 
focus on end results not tasks.  
Performance Appraisal Planning 2016 -2017    SMART Goals: A How to  Guide  
 
 
4 
 3. Goals should be high level enough to encompass the core outcomes for which you 
are responsible, but specific and clear enough so you will be able to measu re 
success.  
4.  Goals  should be on-going job  responsibilities and any new projects, assignments, 
priorities, or initiatives that are specific to this performance cycle.  
5. Having too many goals can be an indicator that your goals are scoped at too low a 
level an d are focused more on tasks than on end results.  
6. If it seems that your goals are becoming too numerous and task -oriented, it may be 
helpful to consider combining several goal statements into a broader outcome area.  
 
How to write your S -M-A-R-T goal  
 
S – Specific  
When setting a goal, be specific about what you want to accomplish. Think about this as the 
mission statement for your goal. This isn’t a detailed list of how you’re going to meet a goal, but 
it should include an answer to the popular ‘w’ question s: 
 Who – Consider who needs to be involved to achieve the goal (this is especially 
important when you’re working on a group project).  
 What – Think about exactly what you are trying to accomplish and don’t be afraid to get 
very detailed.  
 When – You’ll get m ore specific about this question under the “time -bound” section of 
defining S.M.A.R.T. goals, but you should at least set a time frame.  
 Where – This question may not always apply, especially if you’re setting personal goals, 
but if there’s a location or re levant event, identify it here.  
 Which – Determine any related obstacles or requirements. This question can be 
beneficial in deciding if your goal is realistic. For example, if the goal is to open a baking 
business, but you’ve never baked anything before, t hat might be an issue. As a result, 
you may refine the specifics of the goal to be “Learn how to bake in order to open a 
baking business."  
 Why – What is the reason for the goal? When it comes to using this method for 
employees, the answer will likely be al ong the lines of company advancement or career 
development.  
 
Performance Appraisal Planning 2016 -2017    SMART Goals: A How to  Guide  
 
 
5 
    “S” actions may include:  
 
Oversee  Update  Write  
Coordinate  Upgrade  Process  
Supervise  Develop  Provide  
Manage  Create  Maintain  
Plan  Implement  Reconcile  
Support  Evaluate  Direct  
Transition  Produce  Administer  
 
 Note that this list does not include verbs like “improve,” “reduce,” or “increase” (e.g. 
“Improve customer service” or “reduce cost.”   These imply the direction that you want a 
result to move in, but don’t do much to explain the role o r specific action that you will 
take to accomplish this change.  
 
M – Measurable  
What metrics are you going to use to determine if you meet the goal? This makes a goal more 
tangible because it provides a way to measure progress. If it’s a project that’s goi ng to take a 
few months to complete, then set some milestones by considering specific tasks to accomplish. 
Milestones are a series of steps along the way that when added up will result in the completion 
of your main goal.  
 As the “M” in SMART states, there should be a source of information to measure or 
determine whether a goal has been achieved.  
 The M is a direct (or possibly indirect) indicator of what success for a particular goal will 
look like.  
 Sometimes measurement is dif ficult and managers  and employe es will need to work 
together to identify the most relevant and feasible data sources and collection methods.  
 Data collection efforts needed to measure a goal can be  included in that goal’s action  
plan.  
 Even if a perfect, direct measurement source is not im mediately feasible for a given 
goal, the discussion about the desired end result (why this goal is important) and what 
the measurement options are (what success might look like) is an important and 
valuable part of performance planning.  
 Measurement methods  can be both quantitative  (productivity results , money saved or 
earned, etc .) and qualitative  (client testimonials, surveys, etc.) . 
  
Performance Appraisal Planning 2016 -2017    SMART Goals: A How to  Guide  
 
 
6 
  
 Some typical data types and data collection methods may include:  
 
DATA TYPES  DATA COLLECTION METHODS  
Quality/accuracy ra tes Automated reports  
Amounts produced  Audits, tests  
Revenue generated  Surveys  
Productivity rates  Work products, samples  
Customer Satisfaction  Other documents  
 
A – Achievable  
This focuses on how important a goal is to you and what you can do to make it attainable and 
may require developing new skills and changing attitudes. The goal is meant to inspire 
motivation, not discouragement. Think about : 
 how to accomplish the goal , 
 if you have the to ols/skills needed,  
 if not , consider what it would take to at tain them.  
R – Relevant  
Relevance refers focusing on something that makes sense with the broader business goals. For 
example, if the goal is to launch a new program or service , it should be something that’s in 
alignment with the overall business /department  objectives. Your team may be able to launch a 
new program, but if your division  is not prioritizing launching that type of new programs , then 
the goal wouldn’t be relevant.   
T – Time -Bound  
Anyone can set goals, but if it lacks realistic timing, chances ar e you’re not going to succeed. 
Providing a target date for deliverables is imperative. Ask specific questions about the goal 
deadline and what can be accomplished within that time period. If the goal will take three 
months to complete, it’s useful to defin e what should be achieved half -way through the 
process. Providing time constraints also creates a sense of urgency.  
The Easiest Way to Write S.M.A.R.T. Goals  
When it comes to writing S.M.A.R.T. goals, ask yourself and other team members a lot of 
questions. The answers will help fine -tune your strategy, ensuring the goals are something 
that’s actually attainable. Utilize the template provided in the appendix as a guide.