T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
Appendix 
 
Appendix A 
 
   Possible Perceptions Flowing out of Various Center    These are alternative ways you may tend to perceive other areas of your lif                 *         *     If your center is Spouse...    SPOUSE: The main source of need satisfaction.    FAMILY: Good in its place. Less important. A common project.    MONEY: Necessary to properly take care of spouse.    WORK: Necessary to earn money to care for spouse.    POSSESSIONS: Means to bless, impress, or manipulate.                 *         *     If your center is Family...    SPOUSE: Part of the family.    FAMILY: The highest priority.    MONEY: Family economic support.    WORK: A means to an end.    POSSESSIONS: Family comfort and opportunities.                 *         *     If your center is Money...    SPOUSE: Asset or liability in acquiring money.    FAMILY: Economic drain.    MONEY: Source of security and fulfillment.    WORK: Necessary to the acquisition of money.    POSSESSIONS: Evidence of economic success.                 *         *     If your center is Work...    SPOUSE: Help or hindrance in work.    FAMILY: Help or interruption to wo rk. People to instruct  in work ethic. 
   MONEY: Of secondary importance. Evidence of hard work.    WORK: Main source of fulfillmen t and satisfaction. Highest ethic. 
   POSSESSIONS: Tools to increase work effectiveness. Fruits, badge of work. 
                *         *     If your center is Possessions...    SPOUSE: Main possession. Assi stant in acquiring possessions. 
   FAMILY: Possession to use, exploit, dominate, smother, control. Showcase.    MONEY: Key to increasing possessions. Another possession to control.    WORK: Opportunity to possess status, authority, recognition.    POSSESSIONS: Status symbols.                 *         *     If your center is Pleasure...    SPOUSE: Companion in fun and pleasure or obstacle to it.    FAMILY: Vehicle or interference.    MONEY: Means to increase opportunities for pleasure. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   WORK: Means to an end. "Fun" work OK. 
   POSSESSIONS: Objects of fun. Means to more fun.                 *         *     If your center is A Friend or Friends...    SPOUSE: Possible friend or possibl e competitor. Social status symbol. 
   FAMILY: Friends or obstacle  to developing friendships. 
   MONEY: Source of economic and social good.    WORK: Social opportunity.    POSSESSIONS: Means of buying friendship. Means of entertaining or providing social pleasure. 
   These are alternative ways you may tend you perceive other areas of your life                 *         *     If your center is Spouse...    PLEASURE: Mutual, unifyi ng activity or unimportant. 
   FRIENDS: Spouse is best or only friend. Only friends are "our" friends. 
   ENEMIES: Spouse is my defender, or common enemy provides source of marriage definition. 
   CHURCH: Activity to enjoy toge ther. Subordinate to relationship. 
   SELF: Self-worth is spouse based. Highly vulnerable to spouse attitudes and behaviors. 
   PRINCIPLES: ideas which create and maintain relationship with spouse.                 *         *     If your center is Family...    PLEASURE: Family activities or relatively unimportant.    FRIENDS: Friends of the family, or co mpetition. Threat to strong family life. 
   ENEMIES: Defined by family. Source of family stre ngth and unity. Possible th reat to family strength. 
   CHURCH: Source of help.    SELF: Vital part of but subordin ate to family. Subordinate to family. 
   PRINCIPLES: Rules which keep family unified and strong.                 *         *     If your center is Money...    PLEASURE: Economic drain or evidence of economic stress.    FRIENDS: Chosen because of economic status or influence. 
   ENEMIES: Economic competitors. Threat to economic security.    CHURCH: Tax write-off. Hand in your pocket.    SELF: Self-worth is determined by net worth.    PRINCIPLES: Ways that work in making and managing money. 
                *         *     If your center is Work...    PLEASURE: Waste of time. Interferes with work.    FRIENDS: Developed from work setting  or shared interest. Basically unnecessary. 
   ENEMIES: Obstacles to work productivity.    CHURCH: Important to corporate image. Imposi tion on your time. Opportunity to network in 
profession.    SELF: Defined by job role.    PRINCIPLES: Ideas that make you successful in  your work. Need to adapt to work conditions. 
                *         *     If your center is Possessions...    PLEASURE: Buying, shopping, joining clubs.    FRIENDS: Personal objects. Usable.    ENEMIES: Takers, thieves. Others with more possessions or recognition. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   CHURCH: "My" church, a status symbol. Source  of unfair criticism or good things in life. 
   SELF: Defined by the things I own. Defined by social status, recognition. 
   PRINCIPLES: concepts which enable you to acquire and enhance possessions. 
                *         *     If your center is Pleasure...    PLEASURE: Supreme end in life.    FRIENDS: Companions in fun.    ENEMIES: Take life too seriously. Guilt trippers, destroyers.    CHURCH: Inconvenient, obstacle to recreation. Guilt trip.    SELF: Instrument for pleasure.    PRINCIPLES: Natural drives and instincts which need to be satisfied.                 *         *     If your center is Friends...    PLEASURE: Enjoyed always with friends. Primarily social events.    FRIENDS: Critical to personal happiness. Belonging, acceptance, popularily is crucial. 
   ENEMIES: Outside the social circle. Common en emies provide unity or definition for friendship. 
   CHURCH: Place for social gathering.    SELF: Socially defined. Afraid of embarrassment or rejection.    PRINCIPLES: Basic laws which en able you to get along with others. 
                *         *     This is the way you may tend to perceive other areas of your life.                 *         *     If your center is Enemies...    FRIEND OR PLEASURE: Rest and rela xation time before the next battle. 
   ENEMY OR FRIENDS: Emotional supporters and sympathizers. Possibly defined by common 
enemy.    ENEMIES: Objects of hate. Source of pers onal problems. Stimuli to self-protection and 
self-justification.    CHURCH: Source of self-justification.    SELF: Victimized. Immobilized by enemy.    PRINCIPLES: Justification for labeling en emies. Source of your enemy's wrongness. 
                *         *     If your center is Church...    FRIEND OR PLEASURE: "Innoc ent" pleasures as an opportunity to gather with other church 
members. Others as sinful or time wa sters, to be self-righteously denied. 
   ENEMY OR FRIENDS: Ot her members of the church. 
   ENEMIES: Nonbelievers; those who disagree with church teachings or whose lives are in blatant 
opposition to them.    CHURCH: Highest priority. Source of guidance.    SELF: Self-worth is determined by activity in the church, contributions to the church, or performance 
of deeds that reflect the church ethic.    PRINCIPLES: Doctrines taught by the church. Subordinate to the church. 
                *         *     If your center is Self...    FRIEND OR PLEASURE: Deserved sensat e satisfactions. "My rights." "My needs. 
   ENEMY OR FRIENDS: Supporter, provider for "me".    ENEMIES: Source of self-definition, self-justification.    CHURCH: Vehicle to serve self-interests. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   SELF: Better, smarter, more right. Justified in focusing all resources on personal gratification. 
   PRINCIPLES: Source of justification. Those idea s that serve my best interests; can be adapted to 
need.                 *         *     If your center is Principles...    FRIEND OR PLEASURE: Joy that comes from almo st any activity in a focused life. True re-creation 
as an important part of a balanced integrated life-style.    ENEMY OR FRIENDS: Companions in interdepen dent living. Confidants -- those to share with, 
serve, and support.    ENEMIES: No real perceived "enemies"; just people with different paradigms and agendas to be understood and cared about.    CHURCH: Vehicle for true principles. Opportunity for service and contribution. 
   SELF: One unique, talented, creative individual  in the midst of many unique, talented, creative 
individuals who, working independently and in terdependently, can accomplish great things. 
   PRINCIPLES: Immutable natural laws which ca nnot be violated with impunity. When honored, 
preserve integrity and thus lead to true growth and happiness.  
Appendix B 
    A Quadrant II Day at the Office     The following exercise and analysis is desi gned to help you see the impact of a Quadrant II 
paradigm in a business setting on a very practical level.    Suppose that you are the director of marketin g for a major pharmaceutical firm.  You are about to 
begin an average day at the office, and as you look over  the items to attend to that day, you estimate the 
amount of time each one will take.    Your unprioritized list includes the following:    1.  You'd like to have lunch with the general manager (1-1 1/2 hours).    2.  You were instructed the day before to prepare  your media budget for th e following year (2 or 3 
days).    3.  Your "IN" basket is overflowing into your "OUT" basket (1-1 1/2 hours).    4.  You need to talk to the sales manager about last month's sales; his offi ce is down the hall (4 
hours).    5.  You have several items of correspondence that your secretary says are urgent (1 hour).    6.  You'd like to catch up on the medical journals piled upon your desk (1/2 hour).    7.  You need to prepare a presentation for a sales meeting slated for next month  (2 hours). 
   8.  There's a rumor that the last batc h of product X didn't pass quality control. 
   9.  Someone from the FDA wants you to return his call about product X (1/2 hour).    10.  There is a meeting at 2 P.M. for the execut ive board, but you don't know what it is about (1 
hour).    Take a few minutes now and use what you have learned from Habits 1, 2, and 3 that might help you 
to effectively schedule your day.    By asking you to plan only one day, I have automatically elimin ated the wider context of the week 
so fundamental to fourth generation time management.  But you will be able to see the power of Quadrant II, principle-centered paradigm even in the context of one nine-hour period of time 
   It is fairly obvious that most of the items on the list are Quadrant I activities.  With the exception of 
item number six -- catching up on medical journals  -- everything else is seemingly both important and 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
urgent. 
   If you were a third-generation time manager, usin g prioritized values and goals, you would have a 
framework for making such scheduling decisions and wo uld perhaps assign a letter such as A, B, or C 
next to each item and then number 1, 2, 3 under ea ch A, B, and C.  You would also consider the 
circumstances, such as the availability of other people  involved, and the logical amount of time required 
to eat lunch.  Finally, based on all of these factors, you would schedule the day.    Many third-generation time mana
gers who have done this exercise do exactl y what I have described.  
They schedule when they will do what, and ba sed on various assumptions which are made and 
explicitly identified, they would accomplish or at leas t begin most of the items in that day and push the 
remainder onto the next day or to some other time.    For instance, most people indicate that they would use the time between 8 and 9 A.M. to find out 
exactly what was on the agenda for the executive board meeting so that they could prepare for it, to set 
up lunch with the general manager around noon, and to return the call from the FDA.  They usually 
plan to spend the next hour or two talking to th e sales manager, handling those correspondence items 
which are most important and urgent , and checking out the rumor regard ing the last batch of product X 
which apparently didn't pass quality control.  The re st of that morning is spent in preparing for the 
luncheon visit with the general manager and/or for th e 2 P.M. executive board meeting, or dealing with 
whatever problems were uncovered regard ing product X and last month's sales. 
   After lunch, the afte rnoon is usually spent attending to th e unfinished matters just mentioned 
and/or attempting to finish the other most im portant and urgent correspondence, making some 
headway into the overflowing "IN" basket, and hand ling other important and urgent items that may 
have come up during the course of the day.    Most people feel the media budget preparatio ns for the following year and the preparation for the 
next month's sales meeting could probably be put of f until another day, which may not have as many 
Quadrant I items in it.  Both of those are obviousl y more Quadrant II activities, having to do with 
long-term thinking and planning.  The medical jour nals continue to be set aside because they are 
clearly Quadrant II and are probably less import ant than the other two Quadrant II matters just 
mentioned.    What approach did you take as you scheduled those items? Was it similar to the third-generation 
approach? Or did you take a Quadrant II, fourth-gen eration approach? (refer to the Time Management 
Matrix on page 151).  The Quadrant II Approach     Let's go through the items on the list using a Quadrant II approach.  This is only one possible 
scenario; others could be created, which may also be  consistent with the Quadrant II paradigm, but this 
is illustrative of the kind of thinking it embodies.     As a Quadrant II manager, you would recognize that most P activities are in Quadrant I and most PC activities are in Quadrant II.  You would know that the only way to make Quadrant I manageable 
is to give considerable attention to Quadrant II, primarily by working on prevention and opportunity 
and by having the courage to sa y "no" to Quadrants III and IV. 
   The 2:00 P.M. board meeting.   We will assume the 2 P.M. executive board meeting did not have an 
agenda for the attending executives, or perhaps yo u would not see the agenda until you arrived at the 
meeting.  This is not uncommon.  As a result, peop le tend to come unprepared and to "shoot from the 
hip." Such meetings are usually disorganized and fo cus primarily on Quadrant I issues which are both 
important and urgent, and around which there is ofte n a great deal of sharing of ignorance.  These 
meetings generally result in wasted time and inferior  results and are often little more than an ego trip 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
for the executive in charge. 
   In most meetings, Quadrant II items are usually  categorized as "other business." Because "work 
expands to fill the time allotted for its completion" in accordance with Parkinson's Law, there usually 
isn't time to discuss them.  If there is, people have  been so beaten and smashed by Quadrant I, they 
have little or no energy left to address them.    So you might move into Quadrant II by first atte mpting to get yourself on the agenda so that you 
can make a presentation regarding how to optimize the value of executive board meetings.  You might 
also spend an hour or two in the morning preparing for that presentati on, even if you are only allowed 
a few minutes to stimulate everyone's interest in he aring a more extended preparation at the next board 
meeting.  This presentation woul d focus on the importance of al ways having a clearly specified 
purpose for each meeting and a well-thought-out agen da to which each person  at the meeting has had 
the opportunity to contribute.  The final agenda wo uld be developed by the chairman of the executive 
board and would focus first in Quadrant II issues th at usually require more cr eative thinking rather 
than Quadrant I issues that generally  involve more mechanical thinking. 
   The presentation would also stress the impo rtance of having minutes sent out immediately 
following the meeting, specifying assignments give n and dates of accountability.  These items would 
then be placed on appropriate futur e agendas which would be sent out in  plenty of time for others to 
prepare to discuss them.    Now this is what might be done by looking at  one item on the schedule -- the 2  P.M. executive 
board meeting -- through a Quadrant II frame of referenc e.  This requires a high level of proactivity, 
including the courage to challenge th e assumption that you even need to schedule the items in the first 
place.  It also requires consideration in order to  avoid the kind of crisis atmosphere that often 
surrounds a board meeting.    Almost every other item on the list can be a pproached with the same Quadrant II thinking, with 
perhaps the exception of the FDA call.    Returning the FDA call.  Based on the background  of the quality of the relationship with the FDA, 
you make that call in the morning so that whatever it reveals can be dealt with appropriately.  This 
might be difficult to delegate, since another organizat ion is involved that may have a Quadrant I culture 
and an individual who wants you, an d not some delegatee, to respond. 
   While you may attempt to directly influence th e culture of your own organization as a member of 
the executive board, your Circle of Influence is probab ly not large enough to really influence the culture 
of the FDA, so you simply comply with the request.   If you find the nature of the problem uncovered 
in the phone call is persistent or chronic, then you may approach it from a Quadrant II mentality in an 
effort to prevent such problems in the future.  Th is again would require considerable proactivity to 
seize the opportunity to transform the quality of th e relationship with the FDA or to work on the 
problems in a preventive way.    Lunch with the general manager.  You might s ee having lunch with the general manager as a rare 
opportunity to discuss some longer-range, Quadrant II matters in a fairly informal atmosphere.  This 
may also take 30 to 60 minutes in the morning to adequately prepare for, or you may simply decide to have a good social interaction and listen carefully, pe rhaps without any plan at all.  Either possibility 
may present a good opportunity to build yo ur relationship with the general manager. 
   Preparing the media budget.  Regarding item nu mber two, you might call in two or three of your 
associates most directly connected to media budget preparation and ask them to bring their 
recommendations in the form of "com pleted staff work" (which may only require your initials to finally 
approve) or perhaps to outline two or three well-th ought-out options you can choose from and identify 
the consequences of each option.  This may take a full hour sometime during the day -- to go over 
desired results, guidelines, resources, accountability,  and consequences.  But by  investing the one hour, 
you tap the best thinking of concerned people who ma y have different points of view.  If you haven't 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
taken this approach before, you may need to spend more time to train them in what this approach 
involves, what "completed staff work" means, how to synergize around differences and what 
identifying alternative options and consequences involves.    The "In" basket and correspondence.  Instead of  diving into the "IN" ba sket, you would spend some 
time, perhaps 30 to 60 minutes, beginning a training pr ocess with your secretary so that he or she could 
gradually become empowered to handle the "IN" ba sket as well as the correspondence under item 
number five.  This training program might go on fo r several weeks, even mont hs, until your secretary 
or assistant is really capable of being results-minded rather than methods-minded. 
   Your secretary could be trained to go through all correspondence items and all "IN" basket items, to 
analyze them and to handle as many as possible.  Items that could not be handled with confidence 
could be carefully organized, prioritized, and brough t to you with a recommendation or a note for your 
own action.  In this way, within a few months your secretary or executive assi stant could hand 80 to 90 
percent of all the "IN" basket items and correspond ence, often much better than you could handle them 
yourself, simply because your mind is so focused on Quadrant II opportunities instead of buried in 
Quadrant I problems.    The sales manager and last month's sales.  A possible Quadrant II approach to item number four 
would be to think through the entire relationship and performance agreement with that sales manager 
to see if the Quadrant II approach is being used.  The exercise doesn't indicate what you need to talk to 
the sales manager about, but assuming it's a Quad rant I item, you could take the Quadrant II approach 
and work on the chronic nature of the problem as well as the Quadrant I approach to solve the 
immediate need.    Possibly you could train your secretary to hand le the matter without your involvement and bring to 
your attention only that which you need to be aw are of.  This may involve some Quadrant II activity 
with your sales manager and others reporting to you so they understand that your primary function is 
leadership rather than management.  They  can begi n to understand that they can actually solve the 
problem better with your secretary than with you,  and free you for Quadrant II leadership activity. 
   If you feel that the sales manager might be offend ed by having your secretary make the contact, then 
you could begin the process of building that relationsh ip so that you can eventu ally win the confidence 
of the sales manager toward your both taki ng a more beneficial Quadrant II approach. 
   Catching up on medical journals.  Reading medical journals is a Quadrant II item you may want to procrastinate.  But your own long-term profession al competence and confidence may largely be a 
function of staying abreast of this literature.  So, you may decide to put the subject on the agenda for 
your own staff meeting, where you could suggest th at a systematic approach to reading the medical 
journals be set up among your staff.  Members of the staff could study differe nt journals and teach the 
rest the essence of what they learn  at future staff meetings.  In addi tion, they could supply others with 
key articles or excerpts which everyone really needs to read and understand. 
   Preparing for next month's sales meeting.  Re garding item number seven, a possible Quadrant II 
approach might be to call together a small group of  the people who report to  you and charge them to 
make a thorough analysis of the needs of the salesp eople.  You could assign them to bring a completed 
staff work recommendation to you be a specified da te within a week or 10 days, giving you enough 
time to adapt it and have it implemented.  This ma y involve their interviewing each of the salespeople 
to discover their real concerns and needs, or it mi ght involve sampling the sales group so that the sales 
meeting agenda is relevant and is sent out in  pl enty of time so that the salespeople can prepare and 
get involved in it in appropriate ways.    Rather than prepare the sales meeting yourself, you could delegate that task to a small group of people who represent different points of view and di fferent kinds of sales problems.  Let them interact 
constructively and creatively and bring to you a finish ed recommendation.  If they are not used to this 
kind of assignment, you may spend some of that m eeting challenging and training them, teaching them 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
why you are using this approach and how it will bene fit them as well.  In doing so, you are beginning 
to train your people to think long-term, to be re sponsible for completing staff work or other desired 
results, to creatively interact with each other in interdependent ways, and to do a quality job within 
specified deadlines.    Product "X" and quality control.  Now let's look  at item number eight regarding product "X," which 
didn't pass quality control.  The Quadrant II approach would be to study that problem to see if it has a 
chronic or persistent dimension to it.  If so, you co uld delegate to others the careful analysis of that 
chronic problem with instructions to bring to you a recommendation, or perhaps simply to implement 
what they come up with and inform you of the results. 
   The net effect of this Quadrant II day at the o f f i c e  i s  t h a t  y o u  a r e  s p e n d i n g  m o s t  o f  y o u r  t i m e  
delegating, training, preparing a board presentation , making one phone call, and having a productive 
lunch.  By taking a long-term PC approach, hopefu lly in a matter of a few weeks, perhaps months, you 
won't face such a Quadrant I scheduling problem again. 
   As you go through this analysis, you may be th inking this approach seems idealistic.  You may be 
wondering if Quadrant II managers ever work in Quadran t I.  I admit it is idealistic.  This book is not 
about the habits of highly ineffective people; it's ab out habits of highly effective people.  And to be 
highly effective is an ideal to work toward.    Of course you'll need to spend time in Qu adrant I.  Even the best -laid plans in Quadrant II 
sometimes aren't realized.  But Quadrant I can be  significantly reduced into more manageable 
proportions so that you're not always into the stressf ul crisis atmosphere that negatively affects your 
judgment as well as your health.    Undoubtedly it will take considerable patience and persistence, and you may not be able to take a 
Quadrant II approach to all or even most of these item s at this time.  But if you can begin to make some 
headway on a few of them and help create more of a Quadrant II mind-set in other people as well as 
yourself, then downstream there will be quantum improvements in performance. 
   Again, I acknowledge that in a family setting or  a small business setting, such delegation may not be 
possible. But this does not preclude a Quadrant II mind-set which would produce interesting and 
creative ways within your Circle of Influence to  reduce the size of Quadrant I crises through the 
exercise of Quadrant II initiative. 
Sky, Land , River .