T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   1.  Make a list of activities that would help yo u keep in good physical shape, that would fit your 
life-style and that you could enjoy over time.    2.  Select one of the activities and list it as a goal in your personal role area for the coming week.  
At the end of the week evaluate your performance.  If you didn't make your goal, was it because you 
subordinated it to a genuinely higher value? Or did you fail to act with integrity to your values. 
   3.  Make a similar list of renewing activities in your spiritual and mental dimensions.  In your 
social-emotional area, list relationships you would lik e to improve or specific circumstances in which 
Public Victory would bring greater effectiveness.  Select  one item in each area to list as a goal for the 
week.  Implement and evaluate.    4.  Commit to write down specific "sharpen the sa w" activities in all four dimensions every week, to 
do them, and to evaluate your performance and results.  
Inside-Out Again 
    The Lord works from the inside out.  The worl d works from the outside in.  The world would take 
people out of the slums.  Christ takes the slums out of people, and then they ta ke themselves out of the 
slums.  The world would mold men by changing th eir environment.  Christ changes men, who then 
change their environment.  The world would shap e human behavior, but Christ can change human 
nature. 
   -- Ezra Taft Benson 
 
*         *  
    I would like to share with you a personal story which I feel contai ns the essence of this book.  In 
doing so, it is my hope that you will relate  to the underlying principles it contains. 
   Some years ago, our family took a sabbatical le ave from the university where I taught so that I could 
write.  We lived for a full year in Laie on the north shore of Oahu, Hawaii.    Shortly after getting settled, we developed a liv ing and working routine which was not only very 
productive but extremely pleasant.    After an early morning run on the beach, we woul d send two of our children, barefoot and in shorts, 
to school.  I went to an isolated building next to the ca ne fields where I had an office to do my writing.  
It was very quiet, very beautiful, very serene -- no phone, no meetings, no pressing engagements. 
   My office was on the outside edge of the colle ge, and one day as I was wandering between stacks of 
books in the back of the college library, I came across a book that drew my interest.  As I opened it, my 
eyes fell upon a single paragraph that power fully influenced the rest of my life. 
   I read the paragraph over and over again.  It ba sically contained the simple idea that there is a gap 
or a space between stimulus and re sponse, and that the key to both  our growth and happiness is how 
we use that space.    I can hardly describe the effect that idea had on my mind.  Though I had been nurtured in the 
philosophy of self-determinism, the way the idea was phrased -- "a ga p between stimulus and response" 
-- hit me with fresh, almost unbelievable force.  It was almost like "knowing it for the first time," like an 
inward revolution, "an idea whose time had come."    I reflected on it again and again, and it began to  have a powerful effect on my paradigm of life.  It 
was as if I had become an observer of my own partic ipation.  I began to stand in that gap and to look 
outside at the stimuli.  I reveled in the inward sense of freedom to choose my response -- even to 
become the stimulus, or at least to influence it -- even to reverse it. 
   Shortly thereafter, and partly as  a result of this "revolutionary" id ea, Sandra and I began a practice of 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
deep communication.  I would pick her up a little be fore noon on an old red Honda 90 trail cycle, and 
we would take our two preschool children with us -- on e between us and the othe r on my left knee -- as 
we rode out in the canefields by my office.  We ro de slowly along for about an hour, just talking. 
   The children looked forward to the ride and hard ly ever made any noise.  We seldom saw another 
vehicle, and the cycle was so quiet we could easily  hear each other.  We usually ended up on an 
isolated beach where we parked th e Honda and walked about 200 yard s to a secluded spot where we 
ate a picnic lunch.    The sandy beach and a freshwater river coming o ff the island totally absorbed the interest of the 
children, so Sandra and I were able to continue our talks uninterrupted.  Perhaps it doesn't take too much imagination to envision the level of understa nding and trust we were able to reach by spending 
at least two hours a day, every day, for a full year in deep communication.    At the very first of the year, we talked about all kinds of interesting topics -- people, ideas, events, 
the children, my writing, our family at home, future  plans, and so forth.  But little by little, our 
communication deepened and we began to talk more and more about our intern al worlds -- about our 
upbringing, our scripting, our feelings, and self-d oubts.  As we were deep ly immersed in these 
communications, we also observed them and observed ourselves in them.  We began to use that space 
between stimulus and response in some new and inte resting ways which caused us to think about how 
we were programmed and how those prog rams shaped how we saw the world. 
   We began an exciting adventure into our interi or worlds and found it to be more exciting, more 
fascinating, more absorbing, more compelling, more  filled with discovery and insight than anything 
we'd even known in the outside world.    It wasn't all "sweetness and light." We occasi onally hit some raw nerves and had some painful 
experiences, embarrassing experiences, self-revealing experiences -- experiences that made us extremely 
open and vulnerable to each other.  And yet we foun d we had been wanting to go into those things for 
years.  When we did go into the deep er, more tender issues and then ca me out of them, we felt in some 
way healed.    We were so initially supportive and helpful, so  encouraging and empathic to each other, that we 
nurtured and facilitated these internal discoveries in each other.    We gradually evolved two unspoken ground rule s.  The first was "no probing." As soon as we 
unfolded the inner layers of vulnerability, we were no t to question each other, only to empathize.  
Probing was simply too invasive.  It was also too controlling and too logical.  We were covering new, 
difficult terrain that was scary and uncertain, and it  stirred up fears and doubts.  We wanted to cover 
more and more of it, but we grew to respect the n eed to let each other open up in our own time. 
   The second ground rule was that when it hurt  too much, when it was painful, we would simply quit 
for the day.  Then we would either begin the next day where we left off or wa it until the person who 
was sharing felt ready to continue.  We carried aro und the loose ends, knowing that we wanted to deal 
with them.  But because we had th e time and the environment conduc ive to it, and because we were so 
excited to observe our own involvement and to grow  within our marriage, we simply knew that sooner 
or later we would deal with all those loose ends  and bring them to some kind of closure. 
   The most difficult, and eventua lly the most fruitful part of this kind of communication came when 
my vulnerability and Sandra's vulne rability touched.  Then, because of our subjective involvement, we 
found that the space between stimulus  and response was no longer there.   A few bad feelings surfaced.  
But our deep desire and our implicit agreement was to prepare ourselves to st art where we left off and 
deal with those feelings until we resolved them.    One of those difficult times had to do with a ba sic tendency in my person ality.  My father was a 
very private individual -- very controlled and very careful.  My mother was and is very public, very 
open, very spontaneous.  I find both sets of tend encies in me, and when I feel insecure, I tend to 
become private, like my father.  I live inside myself and safely observe. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Sandra is more like my mother -- social, authen tic, and spontaneous.  We had gone through many 
experiences over the years in which I felt her ope nness was inappropriate, and she felt my constraint 
was dysfunctional, both socially and to me as an individual because I would become insensitive to the 
feelings of others.  All of this and much more came out during thos e deep visits.  I came to value 
Sandra's insight and wisdom and the way she helped me  to be a more open, gi ving, sensitive, social 
person.    Another of those difficult times had to do with  what I perceived to be a "hang up" Sandra had which 
had bothered me for years.  She seemed to have an  obsession about Frigidaire appliances which I was 
at an absolute loss to understand.  She would not ev en consider buying another brand of appliance.  
Even when we were just starting out and on a very tight budget, she insisted that we drive the fifty 
miles to the "big city" where Frigidaire appliances  were sold, simply because no dealer in our small 
university town carried them at that time.    This was a matter of considerable agitation to me.  Fortunately, the situation came up only when 
we purchased an appliance.  But when it did come up , it was like a stimulus that triggered off a hot 
button response.  This single issue seemed to be sy mbolic of all irrational thinking, and it generated a 
whole range of negative feelings within me.    I usually resorted to my dysfunctional private behavior.  I suppose I figu red that the only way I 
could deal with it was not to deal with it; otherwise,  I felt I would lose control and say things I shouldn't 
say.  There were times when I did slip and say something negative, and I had to go back and 
apologize.    What bothered me the most was not that she liked  Frigidaire, but that she persisted in making what 
I considered utterly illogical and indefensible statemen ts to defend Frigidaire wh ich had no basis in fact 
whatsoever.  If she had only agreed that her resp onse was irrational and purely emotional, I think I 
could have handled it.  But her justification was upsetting.    It was sometime in early spring when the Frig idaire issue came up.  All our prior communication 
had prepared us.  The ground rules had been deeply established -- not to probe and to leave it alone if 
it got to be too painful for either or both.    I will never forget the day we talked it through.  We didn't end up on the beach that day; we just 
continued to ride through the canefields, perhaps becaus e we didn't want to look each other in the eye.  
There had been so much psychic hist ory and so many bad feelings associ ated with the issue, and it had 
been submerged for so long.  It had never been so critical as to rupture the relationship, but when 
you're trying to cultivate a beautiful unified re lationship, any divisive issue is important. 
   Sandra and I were amazed at what we learned throug h the interaction.  It was truly synergistic.  It 
was as if Sandra were learning, almost for the first ti me herself, the reason for her so-called hang-up.  
She started to talk about her father, about how he had worked as a high school history teacher and 
coach for years, and how, to help make ends meet, he  had gone into the appliance business.  During an 
economic downturn, he had experien ced serious financial difficulties, and the only thing that enabled 
him to stay in business during that time was the fact that Frigidaire would finance his inventory. 
   Sandra had an unusually deep and sweet relationsh ip with her father.  When  he returned home at 
the end of a very tiring day, he wo uld lie on the couch, and Sandra woul d rub his feet and sing to him.  
It was a beautiful time they enjoye d together almost daily for years.  He would also open up and talk 
through his worries and concerns about the business, and he shared with Sand ra his deep appreciation 
for Frigidaire financing his inventory so that he could make it through the difficult times. 
   This communication between father and daught er had taken place in a spontaneous way during 
very natural time, when the most powerful kind of scripting takes place.  During those relaxed times 
guards are down and all kinds of images and thoughts are planted deep in the subc onscious mind.  
Perhaps Sandra had forgotten about all of this until the safety of that year of communication when it 
could come out also in very natural and spontaneous ways. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Sandra gained tremendous insight into herself and into the emotional root  of her feelings about 
Frigidaire.  I also gained insight and a whole new level of respect.  I came to realize that Sandra 
wasn't talking about appliances; she was talking abou t her father, and about loyalty -- about loyalty to 
his needs.    I  r e m e m b e r  b o t h  o f  u s  b e c o m i n g  t e a r f u l  o n  t h a t  d a y ,  n o t  s o  m u c h  b e c a u s e  o f  t h e  i n s i g h t s ,  b u t  because of the increased sense of reverence we had fo r each other.  We discovered that even seemingly 
trivial things often have roots in d eep emotional experiences.  To deal  only with the superficial trivia 
without seeing the deeper, more tender issues is to  trample on the sacred ground of another's heart. 
   There were many rich fruits of those months .  Our communication beca me so powerful that we 
could almost instantly connect wi th each other's thoughts.  When  we left Hawaii, we resolved to 
continue the practice.  During the many years sinc e, we have continued to go regularly on our Honda 
trail cycle, or in the car if the weather's bad, just to talk.  We feel the key to st aying in love is to talk, 
particularly about feelings.  We try to communicate  with each other several times every day, even 
when I'm traveling.  It's like touching in to home  base, which accesses all the happiness, security, and 
values it represents.    Thomas Wolfe was wrong.  You can go home ag ain -- if your home is a treasured relationship, a 
precious companionship.  Intergenerational Living     As Sandra and I discovered that wonderful year, the ability to use wisely the gap between stimulus 
and response, to exercise the four unique endowm ents of our human nature, empowered us from the 
Inside-Out.    We had tried the outside-in approach.  We  loved each other, and we had attempted to work 
through our differences by controlling our attitudes an d our behaviors, by practicing useful techniques 
of human interaction.  But our band-aids and aspiri n only lasted so long.  Until we worked and 
communicated on the level of our essential paradigms , the chronic underlying problems were still there. 
   When we began to work from the Inside-Out, we were able to build a relationship of trust and 
openness and to resolve dysfunctional differences in  a deep and lasting way that never could have 
come by working from the outside in.  The delicious fruits -- a ri ch win-win relationship, a deep 
understanding of each other, and a marvelous sy nergy -- grew out of the roots we nurtured as we 
examined our programs, rescripted ourselves, and ma naged our lives so that we could create time for 
the important Quadrant II activity of co mmunicating deeply with each other. 
   And there were other fruits.  We were able to see on a much deeper level th at, just as powerfully as 
our own lives had been affected by our parents, the lives of our children were being influenced and 
shaped by us, often in ways we didn 't even begin to realize.  Understanding the power of scripting in 
our own lives, we felt a renewed desire to do ever ything we could to make certain that what we passed 
on to future generations, by both precept an d example, was based on correct principles. 
   I have drawn particular attention in this b ook to those scripts we have been given which we 
proactively want to change.  But as we examine our scripting carefully, many of us will also begin to 
see beautiful scripts, positive scripts that have been  passed down to us which we have blindly taken for 
granted.  Real self-awareness helps us to apprecia te those scripts and to appreciate those who have 
gone before us and nurtured us in principle-based living, mirroring back to us not only what we are, 
but what we can become.    There is transcendent power in a strong interg enerational family.  An effectively interdependent 
family of children, parents, grandparents, aunts, un cles, and cousins can be a powerful force in helping 
people have a sense of who they are and wher e they came from and what they stand for. 
   It's great for children to be able to identify th emselves with the "tribe," to feel that many people 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
know them and care about them, even though they're spread all over the country.  And that can be a 
tremendous benefit as you nurture your family.  If one of your children is having difficulty and doesn't 
really relate with you at a particular time in his life,  maybe he can relate to yo ur brother or sister who 
can become a surrogate father or mother, a mentor, or a hero for a period of time.    Grandparents who show a great interest in thei r grandchildren are among th e most precious people 
on this earth.  What a marvelous positive social mi rror they can be!  My mother is like that.  Even 
now, in her late 80s, she takes a deep personal intere st in every one of her descendants.  She writes us 
love letters.  I was reading one the other day on a plane with tears streaming down my cheeks.  I 
could call her up tonight and I know she'd say, "Ste phen, I want  you to know how much I love you 
and how wonderful I think you are." She's constantly reaffirming.    A strong intergenerational family is potentially one of the most fruitful, rewarding, and satisfying 
interdependent relationships.  And many people feel the importance of that relationship.  Look at the 
fascination we all had with Roots some years ago.  Each of us has roots and the ability to trace those roots, to identify our ancestors.    The highest and most powerful motivation in doing that is no t for ourselves only, but for our 
posterity, for the posterity of all mankind.  As someone once observed, "The re are only two lasting 
bequests we can give our children -- one is roots, the other wings." 
 Becoming a Transition Person     Among other things, I believe that giving "win gs" to our children and to others means empowering 
them with the freedom to rise above negative scripti ng that had been passed do wn to us.  I believe it 
means becoming what my friend and associate, Dr. Terry Warner, calls a "transition" person.  Instead 
of transferring those scripts to the next generatio n, we can change them.  And we can do it in a way 
that will build relationships in the process    If your parents abused you as a child, that does not mean that you have to abuse your own children.  
Yet there's plenty of evidence to indicate that you w ill tend to live out that script.  But because you're 
proactive, you can rewrite the script.  You can choose not only not to abuse your children, but to affirm them, to script them in positive ways.    You can write it in your personal mission statement and into your mind and heart.  You can 
visualize yourself living in harmony with that missi on statement in your Daily Private Victory.  You 
can take steps to love and forgive your own parents, and if they are still living, to build a positive relationship with them by seeking to understand.    A tendency that's run through your family for generations can stop with you.  You're a transition 
person -- a link between the past and the future.  And your own change can affect many, many lives 
downstream.    One powerful transition person of  the twentieth century, Anwar Sadat, left us as part of his legacy a 
profound understanding of the nature of change.  Sadat stood between a past that had created a "huge 
wall of suspicion, fear, hate and misunderstanding " between Arabs and Israe lis, and a future in which 
increased conflict and isolation seemed inevitable.  Ef forts at negotiation had been met with objections 
on every scale -- even to formalities and procedural points, to an insignificant comma or period in the 
text of proposed agreements.    While others attempted to resolve the tense situation by hacking at the leaves, Sadat drew upon his earlier centering experience in a lonely prison cell and went to work on the r oot.  And in doing so, he 
changed the course of hist ory for millions of people. 
   He records in his autobiography:    It was then that I drew, almo st unconsciously, on the inner stre ngth I had developed in Cell 54 of 
Cairo Central Prison -- a strength, call it a talent or  capacity, for change.  I fo und that I faced a highly 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
complex situation, and that I couldn't hope to chan ge it until I had armed myself with the necessary 
psychological and intellectual capacity.  My contemplation of life and human nature in that secluded place had taught me that he who cannot change the very fabric of his thought will never be able to 
change reality, and will never, therefore, make any progress.    Change -- real change -- comes from the Inside-Out.  It doesn't co me from hacking at the leaves of 
attitude and behavior with quick-fix personality ethic techniques.  It comes from striking at the root -- 
the fabric of our thought, the fundamental, essentia l paradigms, which give definition to our character 
and create the lens through which we s ee the world.  In the words of Amiel: 
   Moral truth can be conceived in thought.  One ca n have feelings about it.  One can will to live it.  
But moral truth may have been penetrated and possesse d in all these ways, and escape us still.  Deeper 
even than consciousness there is ou r being itself -- our very substance,  our nature.  Only those truths 
which have entered into this last region, which have become ourselves, become spontaneous and 
involuntary as well as voluntary, unconscious as well as  conscious, are really our life -- that is to say, 
something more than property.  So long as we are  able to distinguish any space whatever between 
Truth and us we remain outside it.  The thought, the feeling, the desire or th e consciousness of life may 
not be quite life.  To become divine  is then the aim of life.  Then on ly can truth be said to be ours 
beyond the possibility of loss.  It is no longer outsid e us, nor in a sense even in us, but we are it, and it 
is we.    Achieving unity -- oneness -- with ourselves, with our loved ones, with our friends and working 
associates, is the highest and best and most delicious fruit of the Seven Habits.  Most of us have tasted 
this fruit of true unity from time to time in the pa st, as we have also tasted the bitter, lonely fruit of 
disunity -- and we know how precious and fragile unity is.    Obviously building character of total integrity and li ving the life of love and service that creates such 
unity isn't easy.  It isn't quick fix.    But it's possible.  It begins with the desire to center our lives on correct principles, to break out of 
the paradigms created by other centers an d the comfort zones of unworthy habits. 
   Sometimes we make mistakes, we feel awkward.  But if we start with the Daily Private Victory and 
work from the Inside-Out, the resu lts will surely come.  As we plant the seed and patiently weed and 
nourish it, we begin to feel the excitement of re al growth and eventually taste the incomparably 
delicious fruits of a congruent, effective life.    Again, I quote Emerson: "That which we persist in  doing becomes easier -- not that the nature of the 
task has changed, but our ability to do has increased."    B y  c e n t e r i n g  o u r  l i v e s  o n  c o r r e c t  p r i n c i p l e s  and creating a balanced  focus between doing and 
increasing our ability to do, we become empowered in  the task of creating effective, useful, and 
peaceful lives...for ourselves, and for our posterity.   A Personal Note     As I conclude this book, I would like to share my  own personal conviction concerning what I believe 
to be the source of correct principles.  I believe th at correct principles are na tural laws, and that God, 
the Creator and Father of us all, is the source of th em, and also the source of our conscience.  I believe 
that to the degree people live by this inspired consci ence, they will grow to fu lfill their natures; to the 
degree that they do not, they will not rise above the animal plane. 
   I believe that there are parts to human nature  that cannot be reached by either legislation or 
education, but require the power of God to deal with.  I believe that as human beings, we cannot 
perfect ourselves.  To the degree to which we a lign ourselves with corre ct principles, divine 
endowments will be released within our nature in en abling us to fulfill the measure of our creation.  In 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
the words of Teilhard de Chardin, "We are not human beings having a spiritual experience.  We are 
spiritual beings having a human experience."    I personally struggle with much of what I have shared in this book.  But the struggle is worthwhile 
and fulfilling.  It gives meaning to my life and en ables me to love, to serve, and to try again. 
   Again, T. S.  Eliot expresses so beautifully my own personal discovery and conviction: "We must 
not cease from exploration.  And the end of all ou r exploring will be to arrive where we began and to 
know the place for the first time."