T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
No involvement, no commitment. 
   Now, in the early stages -- when a person is new to an organization or when a child in the family is 
young -- you can pretty well give them a goal and they'll buy it, particularly if the relationship, 
orientation, and training are good.    But when people become  more mature and thei r own lives take on a separate meaning, they want 
involvement, significant involvement.  And if they don't have that involvement, they don't buy it.  
Then you have a significant motivational problem whic h cannot be solved at the same level of thinking 
that created it.    That's why creating an organizational mission st atement takes time, patience, involvement, skill, and 
empathy.  Again, it's not a quick fix.  It takes ti me and sincerity, correct principles, and the courage 
and integrity to align systems, structure, and manage ment style to the shared vision and values.  But 
it's based on correct principles and it works.    An organizational mission statem ent -- one that truly reflects the deep shared vision and values of 
everyone within that organization -- creates a great unity and tremendous commitment.  It creates in 
people's hearts and minds a frame of reference, a set of criteria or gu idelines, by which they will govern 
themselves.  They don't need someon e else directing, controlling, critic izing, or taking cheap shots.  
They have bought into the changeless co re of what the organization is about. 
 Application Suggestions     1.  Take the time to record the impressions you had in the funeral visualization at the beginning of 
this chapter.  You may want to use the chart below to organize your thoughts.    2.  Take a few moments and write down your ro les as you now see them.  Are you satisfied with 
that mirror image of your life.    3.  Set up time to completely separate yourself  from daily activities and to begin work on your 
personal mission statement.    4.  Go through the chart in Appendix A show ing different centers and circle all those you can 
identify with.  Do they form a pattern for the be havior in your life? Are you comfortable with the 
implications of your analysis.    5.  Start a collection of notes, quotes, and ideas you may want to use as reso urce material in writing 
your .personal mission statement.    6.  Identify a project you will be facing in the near future and apply th e principles of mental 
creation.  Write down the results you desire and what steps will lead to those results. 
   7.  Share the principles of Habit 2 with your family or work group and suggest that together you 
begin the process of developing a fa mily or group mission statement. 
 
Habit 3:  Put First Things First TM -- Principles of Personal Managemen 
    Things which matter most must never be  at the mercy of thin gs which matter least 
   - -  G o e t h  
                *         *  
   Will you take just a moment and write down a short answer to the following two questions?  Your 
answers will be important to you as you begin work on Habit 3.    Question 1: What one thing could you do (you are n't doing now) that if you did on a regular basis, 
would make a tremendous positive difference in your personal life?    Question 2: What one thing in your business or professional life would bring similar results? 
   We'll come back to these answers later.  But first, let's put Habit 3 in perspective 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Habit 3 is the personal fruit, the practical fulfillment of Habits 1 and 2. 
   Habit 1 says, "You're the creator.  You are in charge."  It's based on the four unique human endowments of imagination, conscience, independ ent will, and particularly, self-awareness.  It 
empowers you to say, "That's an u nhealthy program I've been given fr om my childhood, from my social 
mirror.  I don't like that ineffective script.  I can change."    Habit 2 is the first or mental creation.  It's ba sed on imagination -- the ability to envision, to see the 
potential, to create with our minds what we canno t at present see without ey es; and conscience -- the 
ability to detect our own uniqueness and the person al, moral, and ethical guidelines within which we 
can most happily fulfill it.  It's the deep contact wi th our basic paradigms and values and the vision of 
what we can become.    Habit 3, then, is the second creation -- the physic al creation.  It's the fulfillment, the actualization, 
the natural emergence of Habits 1 and 2.  It's the exercise of independ ent will toward becoming 
principle-centered.  It's the day-in, day-out, moment-by-moment doing it.    Habits 1 and 2 are absolutely essential an d prerequisite to Habit 3.  You can't become 
principle-centered without first being aware of and developing your own proactive nature.  You can't 
become principle-centered without first being aware of your paradigms and understanding how to shift 
them and align them with principl es.  You can't become principle-ce ntered without a vision of and a 
focus on the unique contribution that is yours to make.    But with that foundation, you can beco me principle-centered, day-in and day-out, 
moment-by-moment, by living Habit 3 -- by practicing effective self-management. 
   Management, remember, is clearly different from leadership.  Leadership is primarily a 
high-powered, right-brain activity.  It's more of an art; it's based on a philosophy.  You have to ask 
the ultimate questions of life when you're dealing with personal leadership issues. 
   But once you have dealt with those issues, once  you have resolved them, you then have to manage 
yourself effectively to create a life congruent with  your answers.  The ability to manage well doesn't 
make much difference if you're not even in the "right  jungle."  But if you are  in the right jungle, it 
makes all the difference.  In fact, the ability to manage well determines the quality and even the 
existence of the second creation.  Management is the breaking down, the anal ysis, the sequencing, the 
specific application, the time-bound left-brain aspe ct of effective self-government.  My own maxim of 
personal effectiveness is this: Manage from the left; lead from the right. 
 The Power of Independent Will     In addition to self-awareness, imagination, an d conscience, it is the fo urth human endowment -- 
independent will -- that really makes effective self -management possible.  It is the ability to make 
decisions and choices and to act in accordance with th em.  It is the ability to act rather than to be acted 
upon, to proactively carry out the program we have  developed through the other three endowments. 
   The human will is an amazing thing.  Time afte r time, it has triumphed against unbelievable odds.  
The Helen Kellers of this world give dramatic eviden ce to the value, the power of the independent will. 
   But as we examine this endowment in the cont ext of effective self-management, we realize it's 
usually not the dramatic, the visible, the once-in-a- lifetime, up-by-the-bootstraps effort that brings 
enduring success.  Empowerment comes from the le arning how to use this great endowment in the 
decisions we make every day.    The degree to which we have developed our indepe ndent will in our everyday lives is measured by 
our personal integrity.  Integrity is, fundamentally, th e value we place on ourselves.  It's our ability to 
make and  keep commitments to ourselves, to "wal k our talk."  It's honor with self, a fundamental 
part of the character ethic, the essence of proactive growth.    Effective management is putting first things firs t.  While leadership decides what "first things" are, 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
it is management that puts them first, day-by-d ay, moment-by-moment.  Management is discipline, 
carrying it out.     Discipline derives from disciple -- disciple to a philo sophy, disciple to a set of principles, disciple to 
a set of values, disciple to an overriding purpose, to a superordinate goal or a person who represents 
that goal.    In other words, if you are an effective manager of  your self, your discipline comes from within; it is a 
function of your independent will.  You are a discipl e, a follower, of your own deep values and their 
source.  And you have the will, the integrity, to su bordinate your feelings, your impulses, your moods 
to those values.    One of my favorite essays is "The Common Deno minator of Success," written by E. M. Gray.  He 
spent his life searching for the one denominator that  all successful people share.  He found it wasn't 
hard work, good luck, or astute human relations, th ough those were all importan t.  The one factor that 
seemed to transcend all the rest embodies the e ssence of Habit 3:  Putting First Things First. 
   "The successful person has the habit of doing th e things failures don't like to do," he observed.  
"They don't like doing them either necessarily.  But th eir disliking is subordinated to the strength of 
their purpose."    That subordination requires a purpose, a missi on, a Habit 2 clear sense of direction and value, a 
burning "Yes!" inside that makes it possible to say "n o" to other things.  It also requires independent 
will, the power to do something when you don't want to do it, to be a function of your values rather 
than a function of the impulse or desire of any give n moment.  It's the power to act with integrity to 
your proactive first creation.  Four Generations of Time Management     In Habit 3 we are dealing with many of the questions addressed in the field of life and time 
management.  As a longtime student of this fascina ting field, I am personally persuaded that the 
essence of the best thinking in the area of time management can be captured in a single phrase: 
Organize and execute around priorities.  That phrase represents the evolution of three generations of 
time-management theory, and how to best do it is  the focus of a wide v ariety of approaches and 
materials.    Personal management has evolved in a pattern similar to many other areas of human endeavor.  
Major developmental thrusts, or "waves" as Alvin To ffler calls them, follow each other in succession, 
each adding a vital new dimension.  For example, in  social development, the agricultural revolution 
was followed by the industrial revolution, which wa s followed by the informational revolution.  Each 
succeeding wave created a surge of  social and personal progress. 
   Likewise, in the area of time management, each  generation builds on the one before it -- each one 
moves us toward greater control of our lives.  The first wave or generation could be characterized by 
notes and checklists, an effort to give some semb lance of recognition and in clusiveness to the many 
demands placed on our time and energy.    The second generation could be characterized by calendars and appointment books.  This wave 
reflects an attempt to look ahead, to sch edule events and activities in the future. 
   The third generation reflects the current time -management field.  It adds to those preceding 
generations the important idea of prioritization, of  clarifying values, and of comparing the relative 
worth of activities based on their re lationship to those values.  In addi tion, it focuses on setting goals -- 
specific long-, intermediate-, and short-term targ ets toward which time and energy would be directed 
in harmony with values.  It also includes the concept of daily planni ng, of making a specific plan to 
accomplish those goals and activities de termined to be of greatest worth. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   While the third generation has made a significan t contribution, people have  begun to realize that 
"efficient" scheduling and control of time are often counterproductive.  The efficiency focus creates 
expectations that clash with the o pportunities to develop rich relationships, to meet human needs, and 
to enjoy spontaneous moments on a daily basis.    As a result, many people have become turned off by time management programs and planners that 
make them feel too scheduled, too restricted, and they "throw the baby out with the bath water," 
reverting to first- or second-generation techniques to  preserve relationships, to meet human needs, and 
to enjoy spontaneous moments on a daily basis.    But there is an emerging fourth generation that  is different in kind.  It recognizes that "time 
management" is really a misnomer -- the challenge is  not to manage time, but to manage ourselves.  
Satisfaction is a function of expectation as well as re alization.  And expectation (and satisfaction) lie in 
our Circle of Influence.    Rather than focusing on things and time, four th-generation expectations focus on preserving and 
enhancing relationships and accomplishing results -- in short, on maintaining the P/PC Balance. 
 Quadrant II     The essential focus of the fourth generatio n of management can be captured in the Time 
Management Matrix diagrammed on the next page.  Basically, we spend time in one of four ways. 
   As you see, the two factors that define an ac tivity are urgent and important.  Urgent means it 
requires immediate attention.  It's "Now!" Urgent th ings act on us.  A ringing phone is urgent.  Most 
people can't stand the thought of just allowing th e phone to ring.  You could spend hours preparing 
materials, you could get all dressed up and travel to a person's office to discuss a particular issue, but if 
the phone were to ring while you were there, it woul d generally take precedence over your personal 
visit.    If you were to phone someone, there aren't ma ny people who would say, "I'll get to you in 15 
minutes; just hold."  But those same people would pr obably let you wait in an office for at least that 
long while they completed a telephon e conversation with someone else. 
   Urgent matters are usually visible.  They press on us; they insist on acti on.  They're often popular 
with others.  They're usually right in  front of us.  And often they are pleasant, easy, fun to do.  But so 
often they are unimportant!    Importance, on the other hand, has to do with resu lts.  If something is important, it contributes to 
your mission, your values, your high priority goals.    We react to urgent matters.  Important matters that are not urgent require more initiative, more 
proactivity.  We must act to seize opportunity, to make things happen.  If we don't practice Habit 2, if 
we don't have a clear idea of what is important, of the results we desire in our lives, we are easily 
diverted into responding to the urgent.    Look for a moment at the four quadrants in the Time Management Matrix.  Quadrant I is both 
urgent and important.  It deals with significant re sults that require immediate attention.  We usually 
call the activities in Quadrant I "crises" or "problems ."  We all have some Quadrant I activities in our 
lives.  But Quadrant I consumes many people.  They  are crisis managers, problem-minded people, the 
deadline-driven producers.    As long as you focus on Quadrant I, it keeps ge tting bigger and bigger until it dominates you.  It's 
like the pounding surf.  A huge problem comes an d knocks you down and you're wiped out.  You 
struggle back up only to face another one that knocks you down and slams you to the ground. 
   Some people are literally beaten up by the proble ms all day every day.  The only relief they have is 
in escaping to the not important, no t urgent activities of Quadrant IV.  So when you look at their total 
matrix, 90 percent of their time is in Quadrant I and mo st of the remaining 10 percent is in Quadrant IV  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
with only negligible attention paid  to Quadrants II and III.  That's  how people who manage their lives 
by crisis live.     There are other people who spend a great deal of  time in "urgent, but not important" Quadrant III, 
thinking they're in Quadrant I.  They spend most of  their time reacting to things that are urgent, 
assuming they are also important.  But the reality is  that the urgency of these matters is often based on 
the priorities and expectations of others.    People who spend time almost exclusively in Quad rants III and IV basically lead irresponsible lives. 
   Effective people stay out of Quadrants III and IV because, urgent or not, they aren't important.  
They also shrink Quadrant I down to size  by spending more time in Quadrant II. 
   Quadrant II is the heart of effective personal mana gement.  It deals with things that are not urgent, 
but are important.  It deals wi th things like building relationsh ips, writing a personal mission 
statement, long-range planning, exercising, preventi ve maintenance, preparation -- all those things we 
know we need to do, but somehow seldom get around to doing, because they aren't urgent. 
   To paraphrase Peter Drucker, effective people are not problem-minded; they're opportunity-minded.  
They feed opportunities and starve problems.  They think preventively.  They have genuine 
Quadrant I crises and emergencies that require their immediate attention, but the number is 
comparatively small.  They keep P and PC in balance by focusing on the import ant, but not the urgent, 
high-leverage capacity-building activities of Quadrant II.    With the Time Management Matrix in mind, take a moment now and consider how you answered 
the questions at the beginning of this chapter.  What  quadrant do they fit in?  Are they important?  
Are they urgent?    My guess is that they probably fit into Qu adrant II.  They are obviously important, deeply 
important, but not urgent.  And because they aren't urgent, you don't do them. 
   Now look again at the nature of those questions:  What one thing could you do in your personal and 
professional life that, if you did on a regular basi s, would make a tremendous positive difference in 
your life?  Quadrant II activities have that kind of  impact.  Our effectiveness takes the quantum leaps 
when we do them.    I asked a similar question to a group of shopping center managers .  "If you were to do one thing in 
your professional work that you know would have enormously positive effects on the results, what 
would it be?"  Their unanimous resp onse was to build helpful personal relationships with the tenants, 
the owners of the stores inside the shoppi ng center, which is a Quadrant II activity. 
   We did an analysis of the time they were spendi ng on that activity.  It was less than 5 percent.  
They had good reasons -- problems, one right after an other.  They had reports to make out, meetings 
to go to, correspondence to answer, phone calls to make, constant interruptions.  Quadrant I had 
consumed them.    They were spending very little time with the store managers, and the time  they did spend was filled 
with negative energy.  The only reason they visited the store mana gers at all was to enforce the 
contract -- to collect the money or discuss advertising or other practice s that were out of harmony with 
center guidelines, or some similar thing.    The store owners were struggling for survival , let alone prosperity.  They had employment 
problems, cost problems, inventory problems, and a host of other problems.  Most of them had no 
training in management at all.  Some were fairly  good merchandisers, but they needed help.  The 
tenants didn't even want to see the shopping ce nter owners; they were just one more problem to 
contend with.    So the owners decided to be proactive.  The
y determined their purpose, their values, their priorities.  
In harmony with those priorities, they decided to  spend about one-third of their time in helping 
relationships with the tenants. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   In working with that organization for about a ye ar and a half, I saw them c limb to around 20 percent, 
which represented more than a fourfold increase.  In  addition, they changed their role.  They became 
listeners, trainers, consultants to the tenants.  Th eir interchanges were filled with positive energy. 
   The effect was dramatic, profound.  By focusing  on relationships and results rather than time and 
methods, the numbers went up, the tenants were thr illed with the results created by new ideas and 
skills, and the shopping center mana gers were more effective and satisfied and increased their list of 
potential tenants and lease revenue based on increased sales by the tenant stores.  They were no longer 
policemen or hovering supervisors.  They were problem solvers, helpers.    Whether you are a student at the university, a worker in an assembly line, a homemaker, fashion 
designer, or president of a company, I believe th at if you were to ask what lies in Quadrant II and 
cultivate the proactivity to go after it, you would find the same results.  Your effectiveness would 
increase dramatically.  Your crises and problems would shrink to manageable proportions because you would be thinking ahead, working on the roots, doing the preventive things that keep situations 
from developing into crises in the first place.  In the time management jargon, this is called the Pareto 
Principle -- 80 percent of the results flow out of 20 percent of the activities.  What it Takes to Say "No"     The only place to get time for Quadrant II in th e beginning is from Quadrants III and IV.  You can't 
ignore the urgent and important activities of Quadrant  I, although it will shrink in size as you spend 
more time with prevention and preparation in Quadra nt II.  But the initial time for Quadrant II has 
come out of III and IV.    You have to be proactive to work on Quadrant II because Quadrant I and III work on you.  To say 
"yes" to important Quadrant II priorities, you have to  learn to say "no" to other activities, sometimes 
apparently urgent things.    Some time ago, my wife was invited to serve as chairman of a committee in a community endeavor.  
She had a number of truly important things she was tryi ng to work on, and she re ally didn't want to do 
it.  But she felt pressured into it and finally agreed.    Then she called one of her dear friends to ask if she would serve on her committee.  Her friend 
listened for a long time and then said, "Sandra, that  sounds like a wonderful project, a really worthy 
undertaking.  I appreciate so much your inviting me to be a part of it.  I feel honored by it.  For a 
number of reasons, I won't be participating myself, but I want you to know how much I appreciate your 
invitation."    Sandra was ready for anything but a pleasant "no."  She turned to me and sighed, "I wish I'd said 
that."    I don't mean to imply that you shouldn't be invo lved in significant service projects.  Those things 
are important.  But you have to decide what your  highest priorities are and have the  courage -- 
pleasantly, smiling, nonapologetically -- to say "no" to other things.  And the way you do that is by 
having a bigger "yes" burning inside.  The enemy of the "best" is often the "good." 
   K e e p  i n  m i n d  t h a t  y o u  a r e  a l w a y s  s a y i n g  " n o "  to something.  If it isn't to the apparent, urgent 
things in your life, it is probably to the more fundamental, highly important things.  Even when the 
urgent is good, the good can keep you from your best , keep you from your uniq ue contributions, if you 
let it.    When I was Director of University Relations at a large university, I hired a very talented, proactive, creative writer.  One day, after he had been on the job for a few months, I went into his office and 
asked him to work on some urgent matters that were pressing on me. 
   He said, "Stephen, I'll do whatever you want me  to do.  Just let me share with you my situation." 
   Then he took me over to his wall board, where he had listed over two dozen projects he was 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
working on, together with performance criteria an d deadline dates that had been clearly negotiated 
before.  He was highly disciplined, which is why I wen t to see him in the first place.  "If you want to 
get something done, give it to a busy man."    Then he said, "Stephen, to do the jobs that yo u want done right would take several days.  Which of 
these projects would you like me to delay or cancel to satisfy your request?"    Well, I didn't want to take the responsibility for that.  I didn't want to put a cog in the wheel of one 
of the most productive people on the staff just becaus e I happened to be managing by crisis at the time.  
The jobs I wanted done were urgent , but not important.  So I went and found another crisis manager 
and gave the job to him.    We say "yes" or "no" to things daily, usually many times a day.  A center of correct principles and a focus on our personal mission empowers us with wisdom to make those judgments effectively. 
   As I work with different groups, I tell them that  the essence of effective time and life management is 
to organize and execute around balanced priorities.  Then I ask this questi on: if you were to fault 
yourself in one of three areas, which would it be: (1) the inability to prioritize; (2) the inability or desire 
to organize around those priorities; or (3) the lack of discipline to execute aro und them, to stay with 
your priorities and organization?    Most people say their main fault is a lack of disci pline.  On deeper thought, I believe that is not the 
case.  The basic problem is that their priorities have not become deeply planted in their hearts and 
minds.  They haven't really internalized Habit 2.    There are many people who recognize the value of Quadrant II activities in their lives, whether they 
identify them as such or not.  And they attempt to  give priority to those activities and integrate them 
into their lives through self-discipline alone.  Bu t without a principle center and a personal mission 
statement, they don't have the necessary foundation to sustain their efforts.  They're working on the 
leaves, on the attitudes and the behaviors of disciplin e, without even thinking to examine the roots, the 
basic paradigms from which their na tural attitudes and behaviors flow. 
   A Quadrant II focus is a paradigm that grows out of  a principle center.  If you are centered on your 
spouse, your money, your friends, your pleasure, or  any extrinsic factor, you will keep getting thrown 
back into Quadrants I and III, reac ting to the outside forces your lif e is centered on.  Even if you're 
centered on yourself, you'll end up in I and II reacting to the impulse of the moment.  Your 
independent will alone cannot effectively discipline you against your center.    In the words of the architectural maxim, form  follows function.  Likewise, management follows 
leadership.  The way you spend your time is a resu lt of the way you see your time and the way you 
really see your priorities.  If your priorities grow  out of a principle center and a personal mission, if 
they are deeply planted in your heart and in your mind, you will see Quadrant II as a natural, exciting 
place to invest your time.    It's almost impossible to say, "no" to the popul arity of Quadrant III or to the pleasure of escape to 
Quadrant IV if you don't have a bigger "yes" burning inside.  Only when you have the self-awareness 
to examine your program -- an d the imagination and conscience  to create a new, unique, 
principle-centered program to which you can sa y "yes" -- only then will you have sufficient 
independent will power to say "no," with a genuine smile, to the unimportant.  Moving Into Quadrant II     If Quadrant II activities are clearly the heart of effective personal management -- the "first things" we 
need to put first -- then how do we or ganize and execute around those things 
   The first generation of time management does no t even recognize the concept of priority.  It gives 
us notes and "to do" lists that we can cross off, an d we feel a temporary sense of accomplishment every 
time we check something off, but no priority is attach ed to items on the list.  In addition, there is no 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
correlation between what's on the list and our ulti mate values and purposes in life.  We simply 
respond to whatever penetrates our aware ness and apparently needs to be done. 
    Many people manage from this first-generation paradigm.  It's the course of least resistance.  
There's no pain or strain; it's fun to "go with the flow."  Externally imposed disciplines and schedules 
give people the feeling that they  aren't responsible for results. 
   But first-generation managers, by definition, are not effective people.  They  produce very little, and 
their life-style does nothing to build their Production  Capability.  Buffeted by outside forces, they are 
often seen as undependable and irresponsible, and they  have very little sense of control and self-esteem. 
   Second-generation managers assume a little more  control.  They plan an d schedule in advance and 
generally are seen as more responsible beca use they "show up" when they're supposed to. 
   But again, the activities they schedule have no priority or recognized correlation to deeper values 
and goals.  They have few significant achi evements and tend to be schedule-oriented. 
   Third-generation managers take a significant step forward.  They clarify their values and set goals.  
They plan each day and pr ioritize their activities. 
   As I have said, this is where most of the time-m anagement field is today.  But this third generation 
has some critical limitations.  First, it limits vision  -- daily planning often misses important things that 
can only be seen from a larger perspective.  The ve ry language "daily planning" focuses on the urgent 
-- the "now."  While third generation prioritization pr ovides order to activity, it doesn't question the 
essential importance of the activity in the first plac e -- it doesn't place the activity in the context of 
principles, personal mission, role s, and goals.  The third-generat ion value-driven daily planning 
approach basically prioritizes the Quadrant I and III problems and crises of the day. 
   In addition, the third generation makes no provisio n for managing roles in a balanced way.  It lacks 
realism, creating the tendency to over-schedule th e day, resulting in frustration and the desire to 
occasionally throw away the plan and escape to Quadrant  IV.  And its e fficiency, time-management 
focus tends to strain relation ships rather than build them. 
   While each of the three generations has recogn ized the value of some kind of management tool, 
none has produced a tool that em powers a person to live a principle- centered, Quadrant II life-style.  
The first-generation note pads and "to do" lists give us no more than a place to capture those things that 
penetrate our awareness so we won't forget them .  The second-generation appointment books and 
calendars merely provide a place to record our fu ture commitments so that  we can be where we have 
agreed to be at the appropriate time.    Even the third generation, with its vast array of  planners and materials, focuses primarily on helping 
people prioritize and plan their Quadrant I and III ac tivities.  Though many trainers and consultants 
recognize the value of Quadrant II activities, the actu al planning tools of the third generation do not 
facilitate organizing and executing around them.    As each generation builds on those that have prec eded it, the strengths and some of the tools of each 
of the first three generations provide elemental materi al for the fourth.  But there is an added need for 
a new dimension, for the paradigm and the implem entation that will empo w e r  u s  t o  m o v e  i n t o  
Quadrant II, to become principle-centered and to mana ge ourselves to do what is truly most important. 
 The Quadrant II Tool     The objective of Quadrant II management is to ma nage our lives effectively -- from a center of sound 
principles, for a knowledge of our pe rsonal mission, with a focus on th e important as well as the urgent, 
and within the framework of mainta ining a balance between increasing  our Production and increasing 
our Production Capability    This is, admittedly, an ambitious objective for peop le caught in the thick of thin things in Quadrants 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
III and IV.  But striving to achieve it will have a phenomenal impact on personal effectiveness. 
   A Quadrant II organizer will need  to meet six important criteria. 
   Coherence:  Coherence suggests that there is harmony, unity, and integrity between your vision 
and mission, your roles and goals, your priorities an d plans, and your desires and discipline.  In your 
planner, there should be a place for your personal mi ssion statement so that yo u can constantly refer to 
it.  There also needs to be a place for your roles and for both short- and long-term goals. 
   Balance:  Your tool should help you to keep ba lance in your life, to identify your various roles and 
keep them right in front of you, so that you don' t neglect important areas such as your health, your 
family, professional preparation, or personal development.    Many people seem to think that success in one are a can compensate for failure in other areas of life.  
But can it really?  Perhaps it can for a limited time  in some areas.  But can success in your profession 
compensate for a broken marriage, ruined heal th, or weakness in personal character?  True 
effectiveness requires balance, and your tool  needs to help you create and maintain it. 
   Quadrant II Focus:.  You need a tool that encou rages you, motivates you, actually helps you spend 
the time you need in Quadrant II, so that you're dealin g with prevention rather than prioritizing crises.  
In my opinion, the best way to do this is to orga nize your life on a weekly basis.  You can still adapt 
and prioritize on a daily basis, but the fundamental thrust is organizing the week. 
   Organizing on a weekly basis provides much greater balance and context than daily planning.  
There seems to be implicit cultural recognition of the week as a single, complete unit of time.  Business, 
education, and many other facets of society ope rate within the framework of the week, designating 
certain days for focused investment and others for re laxation or inspiration.  The basic Judeo-Christian 
ethic honors the Sabbath, the one day out of every seven set aside for uplifting purposes. 
   Most people think in terms of weeks.  But mo st third-generation planning tools focus on daily 
planning.  While they may help you prioritize your activities, they basically only help you organize 
crises and busywork.  The key is not to prioritize  what's on your schedul e, but to schedule your 
priorities.  And this can best be  done in the context of the week. 
   A "People" Dimension:  You also need a tool th at deals with people, not just schedules.  While you 
can think in terms of efficiency in dealing with ti me, a principle-centered person thinks in terms of 
effectiveness in dealing with pe ople.  There are times when principle-centered Quadrant II living 
requires the subordination of schedul es to people.  Your tool needs to  reflect that value, to facilitate 
implementation rather than create gu ilt when a schedule is not followed. 
   Flexibility:  Your planning tool should be your  servant, never your master.  Since it has to work 
for you, it should be tailored to your style, your needs, your particular ways.    Portability:  Your tool should also be portable, so that you can carry it with you most of the time.  
You may want to review your personal mission stat ement while riding the bus.  You may want to 
measure the value of a new opportunity against so mething you already have planned.  If  your 
organizer is portable, you will keep it with you so  that important data is always within reach. 
   Since Quadrant II is the heart of effective self -management, you need a t ool that moves you into 
Quadrant II.  My work with the fourth-generation conc ept has led to the creation of a tool specifically 
designed according to the criteria listed above.  But many good third-generation tools can easily be 
adapted.  Because the principles are sound, the prac tices or specific applications can vary from one 
individual to the next.  Becoming a Quadrant II Self-Manager     Although my effort here is to teach principles, not practices, of effectiveness, I believe you can better 
understand the principles and th e empowering nature of the fourth generation if you actually 
experience organizing a week from a principle-centered, Quadrant II base. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Quadrant II organizing involves four key activities. 
   Identifying Roles:  The first task is to write down your key roles.  If you haven't really given 
serious thought to the roles in your life, you can write down what immediately comes to mind.  You 
have a role as an individual.  You may want to lis t one or more roles as a family member -- a husband 
or wife, mother or father, son or daughter, a member  of the extended family of grandparents, aunts, 
uncles, and cousins.  You may want to list a few role s in your work, indicating different areas in which 
you wish to invest time and energy on a regular ba sis.  You may have roles in church or community 
affairs.    You don't need to worry about defining the roles in  a way that you will live wi th for the rest of your 
life -- just consider the week and write down the areas  you see yourself spending time in during the 
next seven days.    Here are two examples of the way people might see their various roles.    1. Individual    2. Husband/Father    3. Manager New Products    4. Manager Research    5. Manager Staff Dev.    6. Manager Administration    7. Chairman United Way     1. Personal Development    2. Wife    3. Mother    4. Real Estate Salesperson    5. Sunday School Teacher    6. Symphony Board Member     Selecting Goals:  The next step is to think of  two or three important results you feel you should 
accomplish in each role during the next seven days.  These would be recorded as goals.    At least some of these goals should reflect Qu adrant II activities.  Ideally, these short-term goals 
would be tied to the longer-term goals you have iden tified in conjunction with  your personal mission 
statement.  But even if you haven't written your mi ssion statement, you can get a feeling, a sense, of 
what is important as you consider each of yo ur roles and two or three goals for each role. 
   Scheduling:  Now you look at the week ahead with your goals in mind and schedule time to 
achieve them.  For example, if your goal is to produce the first draft of your personal mission 
statement, you may want to set aside a two-hour bloc k of time on Sunday to work on it.  Sunday (or 
some other day of the week that is special to you, yo ur faith, or your circumst ances) is often the ideal 
time to plan your more personally uplifting activities , including weekly organizing.  It's a good time to 
draw back, to see inspiration, to look at your  life in the context of principles and values. 
   If you set a goal to become physically fit through exercise, you may want to set aside an hour three or four days during the week, or possibly every day during the week, to accomplish that goal.  There 
are some goals that you may only be able to acco mplish during business hours, or some that you can 
only do on Saturday when your children are home.  Can you begin to see some of the advantages of 
organizing the week instead of the day?    Having identified roles and set goals, you can tran slate each goal to a specif ic day of the week, either 
as a priority item or, even better, as a specific a ppointment.  You can also check your annual or 
monthly calendar for any appointments you may have previously made and evaluate their importance 
in the context of your goals, transferring those you decide to keep to your schedule and making plans to 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
reschedule or cancel others. 
   As you study the following weekly worksheet, ob serve how each of the 19 most important, often 
Quadrant II, goals has been scheduled or translated into  a specific action plan.  In addition, notice the 
box labeled "Sharpen the Saw TM" that provides a plac e to plan vital renewing Quadrant II activities in 
each of the four human dimensions that will be explained in Habit 7.    Even with time set aside to accomplish 19 impo rtant goals during the week , look at the amount of 
remaining unscheduled space on the worksheet!  As well as empowering you to Put First Things First, 
Quadrant II weekly organizing gives you the freedom and the flexibility to handle unanticipated events, 
to shift appointments if you need to, to savor relati onships and interactions with  others, to deeply enjoy 
spontaneous experiences, knowing that you have proactively organized your week to accomplish key 
goals in every area of your life.    Daily Adapting:  With Quadrant II weekly orga nizing, daily planning becomes more a function of 
daily adapting, or prioritizing activities and resp onding to unanticipated events, relationships, and 
experiences in a meaningful way.    Taking a few minutes each morning to revi ew your schedule can put you in touch with the 
value-based decisions you made as you organized th e week as well as unanticipated factors that may 
have come up.  As you overview the day, you can see that your roles and goals provide a natural prioritization that grows out of your innate sense of balance.  It is a softer, more right-brain 
prioritization that ultimately comes ou t of your sense of personal mission. 
   You may still find that the third-generation A, B, C or 1, 2, 3 prioritizat ion gives needed order to 
daily activities.  It would be a false dichotomy to say that activities are either important or they aren't.  
They are obviously on a continuum, and some importan t activities are more impo rtant than others.  In 
the context of weekly organizing, third-generatio n prioritization gives order to daily focus. 
   But trying to prioritize activities before you ev en know how they relate to your sense of personal 
mission and how they fit into the balance of your lif e is not effective.  You may be prioritizing and 
accomplishing things you don't want  or need to be doing at all. 
   Can you begin to see the difference between organizing your week as a principle-centered, 
Quadrant II manager and planning your days as an individual centered on something else?  Can you 
begin to sense the tremendous difference the Quadran t II focus would make in your current level of 
effectiveness?    Having experienced the power of principle-ce ntered Quadrant II organizing in my own life and 
having seen it transform the lives of hundreds of ot her people, I am persuaded it makes a difference -- a 
quantum positive difference.  And the more comple tely weekly goals are tied into a wider framework 
of correct principles and into a personal mission stat ement, the greater the increase in effectiveness will 
be.  Living It     Returning once more to the computer metapho r, if Habit 1 says "You're the programmer" and Habit 
2 says "Write the program," then Habit 3 says "Run the program," "Live the program."  And living it is 
primarily a function of our independent will, our sel f-discipline, our integrity, and commitment -- not to 
short-term goals and schedules or to the impulse of  the moment, but to the correct principles and our 
own deepest values, which give meaning and cont ext to our goals, our schedules, and our lives. 
   As you go through your week, there will undoub tedly be times when your integrity will be placed 
on the line.  The popularity of reacting to the urge nt but unimportant priorities of other people in 
Quadrant III or the pleasure of escaping to Quad rant IV will threaten to overpower the important 
Quadrant II activities you have planned.  Your principle center, your self-awareness, and your conscience can provide a high degree of intrinsic security, guidance, and wisdom to empower you to 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
use your independent will and maintain  integrity to the truly important. 
   But because you aren't omniscient, you can't alwa ys know in advance what is truly important.  As 
carefully as you organize the week, these will be ti mes when, as a principle-centered person, you will 
need to subordinate your schedule to a higher valu e.  Because you are principle-centered, you can do 
that with an inner sense of peace.    At one point, one of my sons was deeply into  scheduling and efficiency.  One day he had a very 
tight schedule, which included do wn-to-the-minute time allocations for every activity, including 
picking up some books, washing his car, and "dropping" Carol, his girlfriend, among other things. 
   Everything went according to sch edule until it came to Carol.  They had been dating for a long 
period of time, and he had finally come to the conc lusion that a continued re lationship would not work 
out.  So, congruent with his efficiency mode, he ha d scheduled a 10- to 15-minute telephone call to tell 
her.    But the news was very traumatic to her.  One-an d-a-half hours later, he was still deeply involved in 
a very intense conversation with her.  Even then, the one visit was not enough.  The situation was a 
very frustrating experience for them both.    Again, you simply can't think efficiency with  people.  You think effect iveness with people and 
efficiency with things.  I've tried to be "efficien t" with a disagreeing or disagreeable person and it 
simply doesn't work.  I've tried to give 10 minutes of "quality time" to a child or an employee to solve a 
problem, only to discover such "efficiency" crea tes new problems and seldom resolves the deepest 
concern.    I see many parents, particularly mothers with sm all children, often frustrated in their desire to 
accomplish a lot because all they seem to do is meet  the needs of little children all day.  Remember, 
frustration is a function of our expectations, and our expectations are often a reflection of the social 
mirror rather than our own values and priorities.    But if you have Habit 2 deep inside your heart and mind, you have those higher values driving you.  You can subordinate your schedule to those values with  integrity.  You can adapt; you can be flexible.  
You don't feel guilty when you don't meet your  schedule or when you have to change it. 
 Advances of the Fourth Generation     One of the reasons why people resist using thir d-generation time management tools is because they 
lose spontaneity; they become rigid and inflexible.  They subordinate people to schedules because the 
efficiency paradigm of the third generation of manage ment is out of harmony with the principle that 
people are more important than things.    The fourth-generation tool recogn izes that principle.  It also re cognizes that the first person you 
need to consider in terms of effect iveness rather than efficiency is your self.  It encourages you to spend 
time in Quadrant II, to understand and center your li fe on principles, to give clear expression to the 
purposes and values you want to direct your daily deci sions.  It helps you create balance in your life.  
It helps you rise above the limitations of daily plan ning and organize and schedule in the context of the 
week.  And when a higher value conf licts with what you have planne d, it empowers you to use your 
self-awareness and your conscience to maintain in tegrity to the principles and purposes you have 
determined are most important.  Instead of  using a road map, you're using a compass. 
   The fourth generation of self-management is more  advanced than the third in five important ways. 
   First, it's principle-centered.  More than givi ng lip service to Quadrant II, it creates the central 
paradigm that empowers you to see your time in the context of what is really important and effective 
   Second,  it's conscience-directed.  It gives you the opportunity to organize your life to the best of 
your ability in harmony with your deepest values.  But it also gives you the freedom to peacefully 
subordinate your schedule to higher values. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Third, it defines your unique mission, includin g values and long-term goals.  This gives direction 
and purpose to the way you spend each day.    Fourth, it helps you balance your life by iden tifying roles, and by se tting goals and scheduling 
activities in each key role every week.    And fifth, it gives greater context through week ly organizing (with daily adaptation as needed), 
rising above the limiting perspective of a single day and putting you in touch with your deepest values 
through review of your key roles.    The practical thread running through all five of  these advances is a primary focus on relationships 
and results and a secondary focus on time.  Delegation:  Increasing P and PC     We accomplish all that we do through delegation -- either to time or to other people.  If  we 
delegate to time, we think efficiency.  If we de legate to other people, we think effectiveness. 
   Many people refuse to delegate to other people because they feel it takes too much time and effort 
and they could do the job better themselves.  But effe ctively delegating to others is perhaps the single 
most powerful high-leverage activity there is.    Transferring responsibility to other skilled and t rained people enables you to give your energies to 
other high-leverage activities.  Delegation means gr owth, both for individuals and for organizations.  
The late J. C. Penney was quoted as saying that the wisest decision he ever ma de was to "let go" after 
realizing that he couldn't do it all by himself any longer.  That decision, made long ago, enabled the 
development and growth of hundreds of stores and thousands of people. 
   Because delegation involves other people, it is a Public Victory and could well be included in Habit 
4.  But because we are focusing here on principles of personal management, and the ability to delegate 
to others is the main difference between the role of  manager and independent producer, I am approaching delegation from the standpoi nt of your personal managerial skills. 
   A producer does whatever is necessary to accomplish desired results, to get the golden eggs.  A parent who washes the dishes, an architect who draws up blueprints, or a secretary who types 
correspondence is a producer.    But when a person sets up and works with and through people and systems to produce golden eggs, 
that person becomes a manager in the interdepende nt sense.  A parent who delegates washing the 
dishes to a child is a manager.  An architect who heads a team of other architects is a manager.  A 
secretary who supervises other secretaries an d office personnel is an office manager. 
   A producer can invest one hour of effort and produce one unit of result s, assuming no loss of 
efficiency.    A manager, on the other hand, can invest one hour of effort and produce 10 or 50 or 100 units 
through effective delegation.    Management is essentially moving the fulcrum  over, and the key to effective management is 
delegation.  Gofer Delegation     There are basically two kinds of delegation: "gof er delegation" and "stewardship delegation."  Gofer 
delegation means "Go for this, go for that, do this, do  that, and tell me when it's done."  Most people 
who are producers have a gofer delegation paradigm.  Remember the machete wielders in the jungle?  
They are the producers.  They roll up their sleeves and get the job done.  If they are given a position 
of supervision or management, they still think like producers.  They don't know how to set up a full 
delegation so that another person is committed to  achieve results.  Because they are focused on 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
methods, they become responsible for the results. 
   I was involved in a gofer delegation once when our family went water skiing.  My son, who is an 
excellent skier, was in the water being pulled and I was driving the boat.  I handed the camera to Sandra and asked her to take some pictures.    At first, I told her to be selective in her pictur e taking because we didn't have  much film left.  Then I 
realized she was unfamiliar with the camera, so I became  a little more specific.  I told her to be sure to 
wait until the sun was ahead of the boat and until our son was jumping the wake or making a turn and 
touching his elbow.    But the more I thought about our limited foot age and her inexperience with the camera, the more 
concerned I became.  I finally said, "Look, Sandra, ju st push the button when I tell you.  Okay?  And 
I spent the next few minutes yelling, "Take it! -- Take it! -- Don't take it! -- Don't take it!"  I was afraid 
that if I didn't direct her every move ev ery second, it wouldn't be done right. 
   That was true gofer delegation, one-on-one su pervision of methods.  Many people consistently 
delegate that way.  But how much does it really a ccomplish?  And how many people is it possible to 
supervise or manage when you have to be involved in every move they make? 
   There's a much better way, a more effective way to delegate to other people.  And it's based on a 
paradigm of appreciation of the self-awareness, th e imagination, the conscience, and the free will of 
other people.  Stewardship Delegation     Stewardship delegation is focused on results in stead of  methods.  It gives people a choice of 
method and makes them responsible for results.  It takes more time in the beginning, but it's time well 
invested.  You can move the fulcr um over, you can increase your leverage, through stewardship 
delegation.    Stewardship delegation involves clear, up-fr ont mutual understanding and commitment regarding 
expectations in five areas.    Desired Results:  Create a clear, mutual unders tanding of what needs to be accomplished, focusing 
on what, not how; results, not  methods.  Spend ti me.  Be patient.  Visualize the desired result.  
Have the person see it, describe it, make out a quali ty statement of what the results will look like, and 
by when they will be accomplished.    Guidelines:  Identify the parameters within whic h the individual should op erate.  These should be 
as few as possible to avoid methods delegation, but should include any formidable restrictions.  You 
won't want a person to think he had considerable la titude as long as he accomplished the objectives, 
only to violate some long-standing traditional practice  or value.  That kills initiative and sends people 
back to the gofer's creed: "Just tell me what you want me to do, and I'll do it."    If you know the failure paths of the job, identi fy them.  Be honest and open -- tell a person where 
the quicksand is and where the wild animals are.  Yo u don't want to have to reinvent the wheel every 
day.  Let people learn from your mistakes or the mistakes of others.  Point out the potential failure 
paths, what not to do, but don't tell them what to do .  Keep the responsibility for results with them -- 
to do whatever is necessary within the guidelines.    Resources:  Identify the human, financial, te chnical, or organizational resources the person can 
draw on to accomplish the desired results.    Accountability:  Set up the standards of performa nce that will be used in evaluating the results and 
the specific times when reporting and evaluation will take place. 
   Consequences:  Specify what will happen, both go od and bad, as a result of the evaluation.  This 
could include such things as financial rewards, psyc hic rewards, different job assignments, and natural 
consequences tied into the overall mission of an organization. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Some years ago, I had an interesting experien ce in delegation with one of my sons.  We were 
having a family meeting, and we  had our mission statement up on the wall to make sure our plans 
were in harmony with our values.  Everybody was there.    I set up a big blackboard and we wrote down ou r goals -- the key things we wanted to do -- and the 
jobs that flowed out of those goals.  Th en I asked for volunteers to do the job. 
   "Who wants to pay the mortgage?" I asked.  I noticed I was the only one with my hand up. 
   "Who wants to pay for the insu rance? The food? The cars?"  I seem ed to have a real monopoly on 
the opportunities.    "Who wants to feed the new baby?"  There was more interest here, but my wife was the only one 
with the right qualifications for the job.    As we went down the list, jo b by job, it was soon evident that Mom and Dad had more than 
sixty-hour work weeks.  With that  paradigm in mind, some of the ot her jobs took on a more proper 
perspective.    My seven-year-old son, Stephen, volunteered to ta ke care of the yard.  Before I actually gave him a 
job, I began a thorough training process.  I wanted him to have a clear picture in his mind of what a 
well-cared-for yard was like, so I took him next door to our neighbor's.    "Look, son," I said. "See how our neighbor's yard is green and clean?  That 's what we're after: green 
and clean.  Now come look at our yard.  See the mi xed colors?  That's not it; that's not green.  Green 
and clean is what we want.  Now how you get it green is up to you.  You're free to do it any way you 
want, except paint it.  But I'll tell you how I'd do it if it were up to me." 
   "How would you do it, Dad?"    "I'd turn on the sprinklers.  But you may want to use buckets or a hose.  It makes no difference to 
me.  All we care about is that the color is green.  Okay?"    "Okay."    "Now let's talk about 'clean,' Son.  Clean means no messes around -- no pape r, strings, bones, sticks, 
or anything that messes up the place.  I'll tell you what  let's do.  Let's just clean up half of the yard 
right now and look at the difference."    So we got out two paper sacks and picked up one side of the yard.  "Now look at this side.  Look 
at the other side.  See the difference?  That's called clean."    "Wait!" he called.  "I see some paper behind that bush!"    "Oh, good! I didn't notice that newspape r back there.  You have good eyes, Son." 
   "Now before you decide whether or not you're go ing to take the job, let me tell you a few more 
things.  Because when you take the job, I don't do it anymore.  It's your job.  It's called a stewardship.  
Stewardship means 'a job with  a trust.' I trust you to do the job, to get it done.  Now who's going to be 
your boss?"    "You, Dad?"    "No, not me.  You're the boss.  You boss your self.  How do you like Mom and Dad nagging you 
all the time?"    "I don't."    "We don't like doing it either.  It sometimes caus es a bad feeling doesn't it?  So you boss yourself.  
Now, guess who your helper is."    " W h o ? "     "I am," I said.  "You boss me."    " I  d o ? "     "That's right.  But my time to help is limited .  Sometimes I'm away.  But when I'm here, you tell 
me how I can help.  I'll do anything you want me to do."    " O k a y ! "     "Now guess who judges you." 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   " W h o ? "  
   "You judge yourself."    " I  d o ? "     "That's right.  Twice a week the two of us will walk around the yard and yo u can show me how it's 
coming.  How are you going to judge?"    "Green and clean."    " R i g h t ! "     I trained him with those two words for two weeks befo re I felt he was ready to take the job.  Finally, 
the big day came.    "Is it a deal, Son?"    "It's a deal."    "What's the job?"    "Green and clean."    "What's green?"    He looked at our yard, which was beginning to look better.  Then he pointed next door.  "That's 
the color of his yard."    "What's clean?"    "No messes."    "Who's the boss?"    "I am."    "Who's your helper?"    "You are, when you have time."    "Who's the judge?"    "I am.  We'll walk around two times a week and I can show you how it's coming."    "And what will we look for?"    "Green and clean."    At that time I didn't mention an allowance.  But I wouldn't hesitate to attach an allowance to such a 
stewardship.    Two weeks and two words.  I thought he was ready.    It was Saturday.  And he did nothing.  Sund ay...nothing.  Monday...nothing.  As I pulled out of 
the driveway on my way to work on Tuesday, I look ed at the yellow, cluttered yard and the hot July 
sun on its way up.  "Surely he'll do it today," I thought.  I could rationalize Saturday because that was the day we made the agreement.  I could rationali ze Sunday; Sunday was for other things.  But I 
couldn't rationalize Monday.  And now it was Tuesday.  Certainly he'd do it today.  It was 
summertime.  What else did he have to do?    All day I could hardly wait to return home to  see what happened.  As I rounded the corner, I was 
met with the same picture I left that morning.  And there was my son at th e park across the street 
playing.    This was not acceptable.  I was upset and di sillusioned by his performance after two weeks of 
training and all those commitments.  We had a lot of effort, pride, and money invested in the yard and 
I could see it going down the drain.  Besides, my  neighbor's yard was manicured and beautiful, and 
the situation was beginning to get embarrassing.    I was ready to go back to gofer delegation.  So n, you get over here and pick up this garbage right 
now or else!  I knew I could get the golden egg that  way.  But what about the goose?  What would 
happen to his internal commitment?    So I faked a smile and yelled across the street, "Hi, Son.  How's it going?"    "Fine!" he returned.    "How's the yard coming?" I knew the minute I sa id it I had broken our ag reement.  That's not the 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
way we had set up an accounting.  That's not what we had agreed. 
   "How's the yard coming?" I knew the minute I sa id it I had broken our ag reement.  That's not the 
way we had set up an accounting.  That's not what we had agreed.    So he felt justified in breaking it, too.  "Fine, Dad."    I bit my tongue and waited until after dinner.  Th en I said, "Son, let's do as we agreed.  Let's walk 
around the yard together and you can show me how it's going in your stewardship." 
   As we started out the door, his chin began to quiv er.  Tears  welled up in his eyes and, by the time 
we got out to the middle of the yard, he was whimpering.    "It's so hard, Dad!"    What's so hard?  I thought to myself.  You haven't done a single thing!  But I knew what was 
hard -- self management, self-supervision.  So I said, "Is there anything I can do to help?" 
   "Would you, Dad?" he sniffed    "What was our agreement?"    "You said you'd help me if you had time."    "I have time."    So he ran into the house and came back with tw o sacks.  He handed me one.  "Will you pick that 
stuff up?"  He pointed to the garbage from Satu rday night's barbecue.  "It makes me sick!" 
   So I did.  I did exactly what he asked me to do.  And that was when he  signed the agreement in 
his heart.  It became his yard, his stewardship.    He only asked for help two or three more times th at entire summer.  He took  care of that yard.  He 
kept it greener and cleaner than it had ever been under my steward ship.  He even reprimanded his 
brothers and sisters if they left so  much as a gum wrapper on the lawn. 
   Trust is the highest form of human motivation.  It  brings out the very best in people.  But it takes 
time and patience, and it doesn't preclude the ne cessity to train and develop people so that their 
competency can rise to the level of that trust.    I am convinced that if stewardship delegation  is done correctly, both parties will benefit and 
ultimately much more work will ge t done in much less time.  I believe that a family that is well 
organized, whose time has been spent effectively de legating on a one-to-one basis, can organize the 
work so that everyone can do everything in about an hour a day.  But that takes the internal capacity 
to want to manage, not just produce.  The focus is on effectiveness, not efficiency. 
   Certainly you can pick up that room better than  a child, but the key is that you want to empower the 
child to do it.  It takes time.  You have to get invo lved in the training and development.  It takes time, 
but how valuable that time is downstream!  It saves you so much in the long run. 
   This approach involves an entirely new paradigm of delegation.  In effect, it changes the nature of 
the relationship:  The steward  becomes his own bo ss, governed by a conscience that contains the 
commitment to agreed upon desired results.  But it also releases his creative energies toward doing 
whatever is necessary in harmony with correct principles to achieve those desired results. 
   The  principles involved in stewardship delegati on are correct and applicable  to any kind of person 
or situation.  With immature people, you specify fewer desired results and more guidelines, identify 
more resources, conduct more frequent accoun tability interviews, and apply more immediate 
consequences.  With more mature people, you have more challenging desired results, fewer guidelines, 
less frequent accountability, and less meas urable but more discernible criteria. 
   Effective delegation is perhaps the best indicato r of effective management simply because it is so 
basic to both personal and organizational growth.  The Quadrant II Paradigm     The key to effective management of self, or of others through delegation, is not in any technique or 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
tool or extrinsic factor.  It is intrinsic -- in the Quadrant II paradig m that empowers you to see through 
the lens of importance rather than urgency.    I have included in the Appendix an exercise  called "A Quadrant II Day at the Office" which will 
enable you to see in a business se tting how powerfully this paradigm can impact your effectiveness. 
   As you work to develop a Quadrant II paradigm,  you will increase your ability to organize and 
execute every week of your life around your deepest priorities, to walk your talk.  You will not be 
dependent on any other person or thing fo r the effective management of your life. 
   Interestingly, every one of the Seven Habits is  in Quadrant II.  Every one deals with fundamentally 
important things that, if done on a regular basis, would make a tremendous positive difference in our 
lives.  Application Suggestions:     1.  Identify a Quadrant II activity you know has been  neglected in your life -- one that, if done well, 
would have a significant impact in your life, either  personally or professionally.  Write it down and 
commit to implement it.    2.  Draw a Time Management Matrix and try to estimate what percentage of your time you spend 
in each quadrant.  Then log your time for three da ys in 15-minute intervals.  How accurate was your 
estimate?  Are you satisfied with the way you sp end your time?  What do you need to change. 
   3.  Make a list of responsibilities you could dele gate and the people you could delegate to or train 
to be responsible in these areas.  Determine what is needed to start the process of delegation or 
training.    4.  Organize your next week.  Start by wr iting down your roles and goals for the week, then 
transfer the goals to a specific action plan.  At  the end of the week, evaluate how well your plan 
translated your deep values and purposes into your  daily life and the degree of integrity you were able 
to maintain to those values and purposes.    5.  Commit yourself to start organizing on a weekly basis and set up a regular time to do it. 
   6.  Either convert your current planning tool in to a fourth generation tool or secure such a tool. 
   7.  Go through "A Quadrant II Day at the Office " (Appendix B) for a more in-depth understanding 
of the impact of a Quadrant II paradigm.