T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
Part Two  
Private Victory 
 
Habit 1: Be Proactive -- Principles of Personal Visio 
 
   I know of no more encouraging fact than the unquestionable ability of man to elevate his life by 
conscious endeavor. 
   -- Henry David Thorea 
 
   As you read this book, try to stand apart from yourself.  Try to project your consciousness upward 
into a corner of the room and see yourself, in your  mind's eye, reading.  Can you look at yourself 
almost as though yo u were someone else? 
   Now try something else.  Think about the mood  you are now in.  Can you identify it? What are 
you feeling? How would you describe your present mental state    Now think for a minute about how your mind is wo rking.  Is it quick and alert? Do you sense that 
you are torn between doing this me ntal exercise and evaluating th e point to be made out of it? 
   Your ability to do what you just did is unique ly human.  Animals do not possess this ability.  We 
call it "self-awareness" or the ability to think about yo ur very thought process.  This is the reason why 
man has dominion over all things in the world and why he can make significant advances from 
generation to generation.    This is why we can evaluate and learn from othe rs' experiences as well as our own.  This is also 
why we can make and break our habits.    We are not our feelings.  We are not our moods.  We are not even our thoughts.  The very fact that we can think about these things separates us from them and from the animal world.  
Self-awareness enables us to stand apart and examin e even the way we "see" ourselves -- our paradigm, 
the most fundamental paradigm of effectiveness.  It  affects not only our atti tudes and behaviors, but 
also how we see other people.  It becomes our map of the basic nature of mankind. 
   In fact, until we take how we see ourselves (and  how we see others) into account, we will be unable 
to understand how others see and feel about themse lves and their world.  Unaware, we will be unable 
to understand how others see and feel about them selves and their world.  Unaware, we will project 
our intentions on their behavior and call ourselves objective.    This significantly limits our personal potential and our ability to relate to others as well.  But 
because of the unique human capacity of self-aw areness, we can examine our paradigms to determine 
whether they are reality- or principle-based or if they are a function of conditioning and conditions. 
 The Social Mirror     If the only vision we have of ourselves come s from the social mirror -- from the current social 
paradigm and from the opinions, pe rceptions, and paradigms of the people around us -- our view of 
ourselves is like the reflection in th e crazy mirror room at the carnival. 
   "You're never on time."    "Why can't you ever keep things in order?"    "You must be an artist!"    "You eat like a horse!"    "I can't believe you won!" 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   "This is so simple.  Why can't you understand?" 
   These visions are disjointed and out of proportion .  They are often more proj ections than reflections, 
projecting the concerns and cha racter weaknesses of people giving the input rather than accurately 
reflecting what we are.    The reflection of the current social paradigm te lls us we are largely determined by conditioning and 
conditions.  While we have acknowledged the tremen dous power of conditioning in our lives, to say 
that we are determined by it, that we have no control over that influence, creates quite a different map. 
   There are actually three social maps -- three th eories of determinism wide ly accepted, independently 
or in combination, to explain the nature of man.  Genetic determinism basically says your 
grandparents did it to you.  That's why you ha ve such a temper.  Your grandparents had short 
tempers and it's in your DNA.  It just goes throug h the generations and you inherited it.  In addition, 
you're Irish, and that's the nature of Irish people.    Psychic determinism basically says your parents did it to you.  Your upbringing, your childhood 
experience essentially laid out your personal tend encies and your character structure.  That's why 
you're afraid to be in front of a group.  It's th e way your parents brought you up.  You feel terribly 
guilty if you make a mistake because you "remember"  deep inside the emotional scripting when you 
were very vulnerable and tender and dependent.  You "remember" the emotional punishment, the 
rejection, the comparison with somebody else when you didn't perform as well as expected. 
   Environmental determinism basically says your boss  is doing to you -- or your spouse, or that bratty 
teenager, or your economic situation, or national policies.  Someone or some thing in your environment 
is responsible for your situation.    Each of these maps is based on the stimulus/r esponse theory we most ofte n think of in connection 
with Pavlov's experiments with dogs.  The basic idea is that we are conditioned to respond in a 
particular way to a particular stimulus.    How accurately and functionally do these determ inistic maps describe the territory? How clearly do 
these mirrors reflect the true nature of man? Do th ey become self-fulfilling prophecies? Are they based 
on principles we can validate within ourselves?  Between Stimulus and Response     In answer to those questions, let me share  with you the catalytic story of Viktor Frankl. 
   Frankl was a determinist raised in the traditio n of Freudian psychology,  which postulates that 
whatever happens to you as a child shapes your character and personality and basically governs your 
whole life.  The limits and parameters of your life are  set, and, basically, you can't do much about it. 
   Frankl was also a psychiatrist and a Jew.  He was imprisoned in the deat h camps of Nazi Germany, 
where he experienced things that were so repugnant to our sense of decency that we shudder to even 
repeat them.    His parents, his brother, and his wife died in th e camps or were sent to the gas ovens.  Except for 
his sister, his entire family perished.  Frankl hi mself suffered torture and innumerable indignities, 
never knowing from one moment to the next if his path would lead to the ovens or if he would be 
among the "saved" who would remove the bodies or shovel out the ashes of those so fated. 
   One day, naked and alone in a small room, he be gan to become aware of what he later called "the 
last of the human freedoms" -- the freedom his Nazi  captors could not take away.  They could control 
his entire environment, they coul d do what they wanted to his body, but Viktor Frankl himself was a 
self-aware being who could look as an observer at hi s very involvement.  His ba sic identity was intact.  
He could decide within himself how all of this was going to affect him.  Between what happened to 
him, or the stimulus, and his response to it, wa s his freedom or power to choose that response. 
   In the midst of his experiences, Frankl would pr oject himself into different circumstances, such as 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
lecturing to his students after his release from th e death camps.  He would describe himself in the 
classroom, in his mind's eye, and give his students the lessons he was learning during his very torture. 
   Through a series of such disciplines -- mental , emotional, and moral, principally using memory and 
imagination -- he exercised his small, embryonic freed om until it grew larger and larger, until he had 
more freedom than his Nazi captors.  They had mo re liberty, more options to choose from in their 
environment; but he had more freedom, more internal  power to exercise his options.  He became an 
inspiration to those around him, even to some of th e guards.  He helped others find meaning in their 
suffering and dignity in their prison existence.    In the midst of the most de grading circumstances imaginable, F rankl used the human endowment of 
self-awareness to discover a fundamental principle about the nature of man: Between stimulus and 
response, man has the freedom to choose.    Within the freedom to choose are those endowments  that make us uniquely human.  In addition to 
self-awareness, we have imagination -- the ability to create in our minds beyond our present reality.  
We have conscience -- a deep inner awareness of ri ght and wrong, of the principles that govern our 
behavior, and a sense of the degree to which our thou ghts and actions are in harmony with them.  And 
we have independent will -- the ability to act based on our self-awareness, free of all other influences. 
   Even the most intelligent animals have none of  these endowments.  To use a computer metaphor, 
they are programmed by instin ct and/or training.  They can be trai ned to be responsible, but they can't 
take responsibility for that training; in other word s, they can't direct it.  They can't change the 
programming.  They're not even aware of it.    But because of our unique human endowments , we can write new programs for ourselves totally 
apart from our instincts and training.  This is why an animal's capacity is relatively limited and man's 
is unlimited.  But if we live like animals, out of ou r own instincts and conditioning and conditions, out 
of our collective memory, we too will be limited.    The deterministic paradigm comes primarily from  the study of animals -- rats, monkeys, pigeons, 
dogs -- and neurotic and psychotic people.  While th is may meet certain criteria of some researchers 
because it seems measurable and predictable, the hi story of mankind and our own self-awareness tell us 
that this map doesn't describe the territory at all!    Our unique human endowments lift us above the animal world.  The extent to which we exercise 
and develop these endowments empowers us to fulfill our uniquely human potential.  Between 
stimulus and response is our greate st power -- the freedom to choose. 
 "Proactivity" Defined     In discovering the basic principle of the nature of man, Frankl described an accurate self-map from 
which he began to develop the first and most ba sic habit of a highly e ffective person in any 
environment, the habit of Proactivity.    While the word proactivity is now fairly common in management literature, it is a word you won't 
find in most dictionaries.  It means more than merely  taking initiative.  It means that as human beings, 
we are responsible for our own lives.  Our behavior is  a function of our decisions, not our conditions.  
We can subordinate feelings to values.  We have th e initiative and the respon sibility to make things 
happen.    Look at the word responsibility -- "response-ab ility" -- the ability to choose your response.  Highly 
proactive people recognize that responsibility.  They do not blame circum stances, conditions, or 
conditioning for their behavior.  Their behavior is  a product of their own conscious choice, based on 
values, rather than a product of th eir conditions, based on feeling. 
   Because we are, by nature, proactive, if our lives are a function of conditioning and conditions, it is 
because we have, by conscious decision or by defaul t, chosen to empower those things to control us. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   In making such a choice, we become reactive.  Re active people are often affected by their physical 
environment.  If the weather is good, they feel good .  If it isn't, it affects their attitude and their 
performance.  Proactive people can carry their own weather with them.  Whether it rains or shines 
makes no difference to them.  They are value driven ; and if their value is to produce good quality 
work, it isn't a function of whether the weather is conducive to it or not.    Reactive people are also affected by their soci al environment, by the "social weather." When people 
treat them well, they feel well; when people don't,  they become defensive or protective.  Reactive 
people build their emotional lives around the behavi or of others, empowering the weaknesses of other 
people to control them.    The ability to subordinate an impulse to a value is the essence of the proa ctive person.  Reactive 
people are driven by feelings, by circumstances, by conditions, by th eir environment.  Proactive people 
are driven by values -- carefully thought about, selected and internalized values. 
   Proactive people are still influenced by external stimuli, whether physical, social, or psychological.  
But their response to the stimuli, conscious or un conscious, is a value-based choice or response. 
   As Eleanor Roosevelt observed, "No one can hu rt you without your consent." In the words of 
Gandhi, "They cannot take away our self respect if  we do not give it to them." It is our willing 
permission, our consent to what happe ns to us, that hurts us far more than what happens to us in the 
first place.    I admit this is very hard to accept emotionally, especially if we have had years and years of 
explaining our misery in the name of circumstance or someone else's behavior.  But until a person can 
say deeply and honestly, "I am what  I am today because of the choice s I made yesterday," that person 
cannot say, "I choose otherwise."    Once in Sacramento when I was speaking on th e subject of Proactivity, a woman in the audience 
stood up in the middle of my presentation and start ed talking excitedly.  It was a large audience, and 
as a number of people turned to look at her, she suddenly became aware of what she was doing, grew 
embarrassed and sat back down.  But she seemed to find it difficult to restrain herself and started 
talking to the people around her.  She seemed so happy.    I could hardly wait for a break to find ou t what had happened.  When it finally came, I 
immediately went to her and asked if she would be willing to share her experience.    "You just can't imagine what's happened to me!" she exclaimed.  "I'm a full-time nurse to the most 
miserable, ungrateful man you can possibly imagine.  Nothing I do is good enough for him.  He never 
expresses appreciation; he hardly even acknowledges  me.  He constantly harp s at me and finds fault 
with everything I do.  This man has made my life mi serable and I often take my  frustration out on my 
family.  The other nurses feel the same way.  We almost pray for his demise.    "And for you to have the gall to stand up there and suggest that nothing can hurt me, that no one can hurt me without my consent, and that I have chosen my own emotional life of being miserable -- 
well, there was just no way I could buy into that.    "But I kept thinking about it.  I really went insi de myself and began to ask, 'Do I have the power to 
choose my response?"    "When I finally realized that I do have that power, when I swallowed that bitter pill and realized 
that I had chosen to be miserable, I also rea lized that I could choose not to be miserable. 
   "At that moment I stood up.  I felt as though I was being let out of San Quentin.  I wanted to yell 
to the whole world, 'I am free! I am let out of pr ison! No longer am I going to be controlled by the 
treatment of some person.'"    It's not what happens to us, but our response to what happens to us that hu rts us.  Of course, things 
can hurt us physically or economically and can cause sorrow.  But our character, our basic identity, 
does not have to be hurt at all.  In fact, our most  difficult experiences become the crucibles that forge 
our character and develop the internal powers, the fr eedom to handle difficult circumstances in the 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
future and to inspire others to do so as well. 
   Frankl is one of many who have been able  to develop the personal freedom in difficult 
circumstances to lift and inspire others.  The auto biographical accounts of Vietnam prisoners of war 
provide additional persuasive testimony of the tran sforming power of such personal freedom and the 
effect of the responsible use of that freedom on the prison culture and on the prisoners, both then and 
now.    We have all known individuals in very difficult  circumstances, perhaps wi th a terminal illness or a 
severe physical handicap, who maintain magnific ent emotional strength.  How inspired we are by 
their integrity! Nothing has a greater, longer la sting impression upon an other person than the 
awareness that someone has transcended suffering, has transcended circumstance, and is embodying 
and expressing a value that inspires and ennobles and lifts life.    One of the most inspiring times Sandra and I have  ever had took place over a four-year period with 
a dear friend of ours named Carol,  who had a wasting cancer disease.   She had been one of Sandra's 
bridesmaids, and they had been best friends for over 25 years.    When Carol was in the very la st stages of the disease, Sandra spent time at her bedside helping her 
write her personal history.  She returned from thos e protracted and difficult sessions almost transfixed 
by admiration for her friend's courage and her desi re to write special messages to be given to her 
children at different stages in their lives.    Carol would take as little pain-killing medication as  possible so that she had full access to her mental 
and emotional faculties.  Then she would whisper into a tape recorder or to Sandra directly as she took 
notes.  Carol was so proactive, so brave, and so concerned about others that she became an enormous 
source of inspiration to many people around her.    I'll never forget the experience of looking deep ly into Carol's eyes the day before she passed away 
and sensing out of that deep hollo wed agony a person of tremendous intrinsic worth.  I could see in 
her eyes a life of character, contribution, and serv ice as well as love, concern, and appreciation. 
   Many times over the years, I have asked groups of people how many have ever experienced being in 
the presence of a dying indivi dual who had a magnificent attitude and communicated love and 
compassion and served in unmatchable ways to th e very end.  Usually, about one-fourth of the 
audience respond in the affirmative.  I then ask ho w many of them will never forget these individuals 
-- how many were transformed, at least temporarily , by the inspiration of such courage, and were 
deeply moved and motivated to more noble acts of service and compassion.  The same people respond 
again, almost inevitably.    Viktor Frankl suggests that there are three cent ral values in life -- the experiential, or that which 
happens to us; the creative, or that which we bring into  existence; and the attitudinal, or our response in 
difficult circumstances such as terminal illness.    My own experience with peop le confirms the point Frankl make s -- that the highest of the three 
values is attitudinal, in the paradig m of reframing sense.  In other words, what matters most is how we 
respond to what we experience in life.    Difficult circumstances often create Paradigm Sh ifts, whole new frames of reference by which people 
see the world and themselves and others in it, and what  life is asking of them.  Their larger perspective 
reflects the attitudinal values that lift and inspire us all.  Taking the Initiative     Our basic nature is to act, and not be acted up on.  As well as enabling us to choose our response to 
particular circumstances, this empo wers us to create circumstances 
   Taking initiative does not mean being pushy, ob noxious, or aggressive.  It does mean recognizing 
our responsibility to make things happen. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Over the years, I have frequently counseled people  who wanted better jobs to show more initiative -- 
to take interest and aptitude tests, to study the in dustry, even the specific problems the organizations 
they are interested in are facing, and then to de velop an effective presen tation showing how their 
abilities can help solve the organization's problem.  It 's called "solution selling," and is a key paradigm 
in business success.    The response is usually agreement -- most pe ople can see how powerfully such an approach would 
affect their opportunities for employment or adva ncement.  But many of them fail to take the 
necessary steps, the initiative, to make it happen.    "I don't know where to go to ta ke the interest and aptitude test." 
   "How do I study industry and organizat ional problems? No one wants to help me." 
   Many people wait for something to happen or so meone to take care of them.  But people who end 
up with the good jobs are the proactive ones who are solutions to problems, not problems themselves, 
who seize the initiative to do whatever is necessary , consistent with correct principles, to get the job 
done.    Whenever someone in our family, even one of th e younger children, takes an irresponsible position 
and waits for someone else to make things happen or  provide a solution, we tell them, "Use your R and 
I!" (resourcefulness and initiative).  In fact, often before we can say it, they answer their own 
complaints, "I know -- use my R and I!"    Holding people to the responsible course is not demeaning; it is affirming. Proactivity is part of 
human nature, and although the proactive muscles may be dormant, they are there.  By respecting the 
proactive nature of other people, we provide them wi th at least one clear, undistorted reflection from 
the social mirror.    Of course, the maturity level of the individual ha s to be taken into account.  We can't expect high 
creative cooperation from those who are deep into em otional dependence.  But we can, at least, affirm 
their basic nature and create an atmosphere where pe ople can seize opportunities and solve problems in 
an increasingly self-reliant way.  Act or be Acted Upon     The difference between people who exercise initia tive and those who don't is  literally the difference 
between night and day.  I'm not talking about a 25 to  50 percent difference in effectiveness; I'm talking 
about a 5000-plus percent difference, particularly if they are smart, aware, and sensitive to others. 
   It takes initiative to create the P/PC Balance of effectiveness in your life.  It takes initiative to 
develop the Seven Habits.  As you study the other six habits, you will see that each depends on the 
development of your proactive muscles.  Each puts the responsibility on you to act.  If you wait to be 
acted upon, you will be acted upon.  And growth an d opportunity consequences attend either road. 
   At one time I worked with a group of people  in the home improvement industry, representatives 
from 20 different organizations who met quarterly  to share their numbers and problems in an 
uninhibited way.    This was during a time of heavy recession, and the negative impact on this particular industry was 
even heavier than on the economy in general.  These people were fairly discouraged as we began. 
   The first day, our discussion question was "Wha t's happening to us? What's the stimulus?" Many 
things were happening.  The environmental pr essures were powerful.  There was widespread 
unemployment, and many of these people were laying off friends just to maintain the viability of their 
enterprises.  By the end of the day, everyone was even more discouraged.    The second day, we addressed the question, "W hat's going to happen in the future?" We studied 
environmental trends with the unde rlying reactive assumption that those things would create their 
future.  By the end of the second day, we were even  more depressed.  Things were going to get worse 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
before they got better, and everyone knew it. 
   So on the third day, we decided to focus on th e proactive question, "What is our response? What are 
we going to do? How can we exercise initiative in this situation?" In the morning we talked about 
managing and reducing costs.  In the aftern oon we discussed increasing market share.  We 
brainstormed both areas, then concentrated on several very practical, very doable things.  A new spirit 
of excitement, hope, and proactive awareness concluded the meetings.    At the every end of the thir d day, we summarized the results of the conference in a three-part 
answer to the question, "How's business?"    Part one: What's happening to us is not good, an d the trends suggest that it  will get worse before it 
gets better    Part two: But what we are causing to happen is  very good, for we are better managing and reducing 
our costs and increasing our market share    Part three: Therefore, business is better than ever    Now what would a reactive mind say to that? "Oh , come on.  Face facts.  You can only carry this 
positive thinking and self-psych approach so f ar.  Sooner or later you have to face reality." 
   But that's the difference between positive thinking  and proactivity.  We did face reality.  We faced 
the reality of the current circumstance and of future projections.  But we also faced the reality that we 
had the power to choose a positive response to those circumstances and projections.  Not facing reality 
would have been to accept the idea that what's happening in our environm ent had to determine us. 
   Businesses, community groups, organizations of ev ery kind -- including families -- can be proactive.  
They can combine the creativity and resourcefulness of proactive individuals to create a proactive 
culture within the organization.  The organization does  not have to be at the mercy of the environment; 
it can take the initiative to accomplish the shared values and purposes of the individuals involved. 
 Listening to our Language     Because our attitudes and behaviors flow out of our paradigms, if we us e our self-awareness to 
examine them, we can often see in them the nature  of our underlying maps.  Our language, for 
example, is a very real indicator of the degr ee to which we see ourselves as proactive people. 
   The language of reactive people  absolves them of  responsibility. 
   "That's me.  That's just the way I am." I am  determined.  There's nothing I can do about it. 
   "He makes me so mad!" I'm not responsible.  My  emotional life is governed by something outside 
my control.    "I can't do that.  I just don't have the time."  Something outside me -- limited time -- is controlling 
me.    "If only my wife were more patient." Someon e else's behavior is limiting my effectiveness. 
   "I have to do it." Circumstan ces or other people are forcing me to do what I do.  I'm not free to 
choose my own actions.    Reactive Language: There's nothing I can do.   That's just the way I am.  He makes me so mad.  
They won't allow that.  I have to do that.  I can't.  I must.  If only. 
   Proactive Language:  Let's look at our alternat ives.  I can choose a different approach.  I control 
my own feelings.  I can create an effective presen tation.  I will choose an appropriate response.  I 
choose.  I prefer.  I will.    That language comes from a basic paradigm of determinism.  And the whole spirit of it is the 
transfer of responsibility.  I am not resp onsible, not able to choose my response. 
   One time a student asked me, "Will you excuse me from class? I have to go on a tennis trip." 
   "You have to go, or you choose to go?" I asked.    "I really have to," he exclaimed. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   "What will happen if you don't?" 
   "Why, they'll kick me off the team."    "How would you like that consequence?"    "I wouldn't."    "In other words, you choose to go because you wa nt the consequence of stay ing on the team.  What 
will happen if you miss my class?"    "I don't know."    "Think hard.  What do you think would be the natural consequence of not coming to class?" 
   "You wouldn't kick me out, would you?"    "That would be a social consequence.  That wo uld be artificial.  If you don't participate on the 
tennis team, you don't play.  That's natural.  But if you don't come to class, what would be the natural 
consequence?"    "I guess I'll miss the learning."    "That's right.  So you have to weigh that consequence against the other consequence and make a 
choice.  I know if it were me, I'd choose to go on  the tennis trip.  But never say you have to do 
anything."    "I choose to go on the tennis trip," he meekly replied.    "And miss my class?" I replied in mock disbelief.    A serious problem with reactive language is that it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.  People 
become reinforced in the paradigm that they are de termined, and they produce evidence to support the 
belief.  They feel increasingly victimized and out of control, not in charge of th eir life or their destiny.  
They blame outside forces -- other people, circumst ances, even the stars -- for their own situation. 
   At one seminar where I was speaking on the concept of proactivity, a man came up and said, 
"Stephen, I like what you're saying.  But every situat ion is so different.  Look at my marriage.  I'm 
really worried.  My wife and I just don't have th e same feelings for each other we used to have.  I 
guess I just don't love her anymore and she doesn't love me.  What can I do?" 
   "The feeling isn't there anymore?" I asked.    "That's right," he reaffirmed.  "And we have th ree children we're really concerned about.  What do 
you suggest?"    "Love her," I replied.    "I told you, the feeling just isn't there anymore."    "Love her."    "You don't understand.  The f eeling of love just isn't there." 
   "Then love her.  If the feeling isn't th ere, that's a good reason to love her." 
   "But how do you love when you don't love?"    "My friend, love is a verb.  Love -- the feeling -- is a fruit of love the verb.  So love her.  Sacrifice.  Listen to her.  Empathize.  Appreciate.  Affirm her.  Are you willing to do that?" 
   In the great literature of all progressive societies, love is a verb.  Reactive people make it a feeling.  
They're driven by feelings.  Hollywood has generally scripted us to believe that we are not responsible, 
that we are a product of our feelin gs.  But the Hollywood script does not describe the reality.  If our 
feelings control our actions, it is because we have  abdicated our responsibility and empowered them to 
do so.    Proactive people make love a verb.  Love is something you do: the sacrifices you make, the giving 
of self, like a mother bringing a newborn into the wo rld.  If you want to study love, study those who 
sacrifice for others, even for people who offend or do not love in return.  If you are a parent, look at the 
love you have for the children you sacrificed for.  Lo ve is a value that is actualized through loving 
actions.  Proactive people subordinate feelings to  values.  Love, the feeling, can be recaptured. 
 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
Circle of Concern. Circle of Influence. 
    Another excellent way to become more self-aware  regarding our own degree of proactivity is to look 
at where we focus our time and energy.  We each have a wide range of concerns -- our health, our 
children, problems at work, the national debt, nucl ear war.  We could separate those from things in 
which we have no particular mental or emotional involvement by creating a "Circle of Concern. 
   As we look at those things within our Circle of  Concern, it becomes apparent that there are some 
things over which we have no real control and ot hers that we can do something about.  We could 
identify those concerns in the latter group by circumsc ribing them within a smaller Circle of Influence.  
By determining which of these two circles is the focu s of most of our time and energy, we can discover 
much about the degree of our proactivity.    Proactive people focus their efforts in the Circle of Influence.  They work on the things they can do 
something about.  The nature of their energy is positive, enlarging and ma gnifying, causing their 
Circle of Influence to increase.    Reactive people, on the other hand, focus their e fforts in the Circle of Concern.  They focus on the 
weakness of other people, the problems in the envi ronment, and circumstances over which they have 
no control.  Their focus results in blaming and accusing attitudes,  reactive language, and increased 
feelings of victimization.  The negative energy generat ed by that focus, combined with neglect in areas 
they could do something about, causes their Circle of Influence to shrink. 
   As long as we are working in ou r Circle of Concern, we empower the things within it to control us.  
We aren't taking the proactive initiative necessary to effect positive change.    Earlier, I shared with you the story of my son who was having serious problems in school.  Sandra 
and I were deeply concerned about his apparent weaknesses and about the way other people were 
treating him.    But those things were in our Circle of Concern.  As long as we focused our efforts on those things, 
we accomplished nothing, except to increase our ow n feelings of inadequacy  and helplessness and to 
reinforce our son's dependence.    It was only when we went to work in our Ci rcle of Influence, when we focused on our own 
paradigms, that we began to create a positive energy that changed ourselves and eventually influenced 
our son as well.  By working on ourselves inst ead of worrying about cond itions, we were able to 
influence the conditions.    Because of position, wealth, role, or relationship s, there are some circumst ances in which a person's 
Circle of Influence is larger than  his or her Circle of Concern. 
   This situation reflects on a self-inflicted emot ional myopia -- another re active selfish life-style 
focused in the Circle of Concern.    Though they may have to prioritize the use of their influence, proactive people have a Circle of 
Concern that is at least as big as their Circle of  Influence, accepting the responsibility to use their 
influence effectively.  Direct, Indirect, and No Control     The problems we face fall in one of three areas: direct control (problems involving our own 
behavior); indirect control (problems involving other people's behavior); or no control (problems we can 
do nothing about, such as our past or situational re alities).  The proactive approach puts the first step 
in the solution of all three kinds of proble ms within our present Circle of Influence. 
    Direct control problems are solved by working on  our habits.  They are obviously within our Circle 
of Influence.  These are the "Private Victories" of Habits 1, 2, and 3. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Indirect control problems are solved by changi ng our methods of influence.  These are the "Public 
Victories" of Habits 4, 5, and 6.  I have persona lly identified over 30 separate methods of human 
influence -- as separate as empathy is from confront ation, as separate as example is from persuasion.  
M o s t  p e o p l e  h a v e  o n l y  t h r e e  o r  f o u r  o f  t h e s e  methods in their repertoire, starting usually with 
reasoning, and, if that doesn't work, moving to flight  or fight.  How liberating it is to accept the idea 
that I can learn new methods of human influence inst ead of constantly trying to use old ineffective 
methods to "shape up" someone else!    No control problems involve taking the responsib ility to change the line on the bottom on our face -- 
to smile, to genuinely and peacefully  accept these problems and learn to live with them, even though 
we don't like them.  In this way, we do not empower these problems to control us.  We share in the 
spirit embodied in the Alcoholics Anonymous prayer, "Lord, give me the courage to change the things 
which can and ought to be changed, the serenity to accept the things which cannot be changed, and the 
wisdom to know the difference."    Whether a problem is direct, indirect, or no co ntrol, we have in our hands the first step to the 
solution.  Changing our habits, changing our methods of influenc e and changing the way we see our 
no control problems are all with in our Circle of Influence. 
 Expanding the Circle of Influence     It is inspiring to realize that in choosing ou r response to circumstance, we powerfully affect our 
circumstance.  When we change one part of the chemical formula, we ch ange the nature of the results 
   I worked with one organization for several years  that was headed by a very dynamic person.  He 
could read trends.  He was creative, talented, capable, and brilliant -- and everyone knew it.  But he had a very dictatorial style of management.  He tended  to treat people like "gofers," as if they didn't 
have any judgment.  His manner of speaking to those who worked in the organization was, "Go for 
this; go for that; now do this; now do that -- I'll make the decisions. 
   The net effect was that he alienated almost the entire executive team surro unding him.  They would 
gather in the corridors and complain to each other about him.  Their discussion was all very 
sophisticated, very articulate, as if they were trying  to help the situation.  But they did it endlessly, 
absolving themselves of responsibility in the name of the president's weaknesses. 
   "You can't imagine what's happened this time," someone would say.  "The other day he went into 
my department.  I had everything all laid out.  But he came in and gave totally different signals.  Everything I'd done for months was shot,  just lik e that.  I don't know how I'm supposed to keep 
working for him.  How long will it be until he retires?"    "He's only fifty-nine," someone else would re spond.  "Do you think you can survive for six more 
years?"    "I don't know.  He's the kind of pe rson they probably won't retire anyway." 
   But one of the executives was proactive.  He was driven by values, not feelings.  He took initiative 
-- he anticipated, he empathized, he read the situatio n.  He was not blind to the president's weaknesses; 
but instead of criticizing them, he would compensa te for them.  Where the president was weak in his 
style, he'd try to buffer his own people and make su ch weaknesses irrelevant.  And he'd work with the 
president's strengths -- his vision, talent, creativity.    This man focused on his Circle of Influence.  He was treated like a gofer, also.  But he would do 
more than what was expected.  He anticipated th e president's need.  He read with empathy the 
president's underlying concern, so when he presente d information, he also gave his analysis and his 
recommendations based on that analysis.    As I sat one day with the president in an adviso ry capacity, he said, "Stephen, I just can't believe 
what this man has done.  He's not only given me  the information I requested, but he's provided 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
additional information that's exactl y what we needed.  He even gave me  his analysis of it in terms of 
my deepest concerns, and a list of his recommendations.    "The recommendations are consistent with the anal ysis, and the analysis is consistent with the data.  
He's remarkable! What a relief not to have to worry about this part of the business." 
   At the next meeting, it was "go for this" and "go fo r that" to all the executives but one.  To this man, 
it was "What's your opinion?" His Circle of Influence had grown    This caused quite a stir in the organization.  The reactive minds in the executive corridors began 
shooting their vindictive ammuni tion at this proactive man. 
   It's the nature of reactive people to absolve themse lves of responsibility.  It's  so much safer to say, "I 
am not responsible." If I say "I am responsible," I mi ght have to say, "I am irresponsible." It would be 
very hard for me to say that I have the power to  choose my response and that the response I have 
chosen has resulted in my involvement in a negative , collusive environment, especially if for years I 
have absolved myself of responsibility for resu lts in the name of someone else's weaknesses. 
   So these executives focused on finding more in formation, more ammunition, more evidence as to 
why they weren't responsible.    But this man was proactive toward them, too.  Little by little, his Circle of Influence toward them grew also.  It continued to expand to the extent th at eventually no one made any significant moves in 
the organization without that man's involvement an d approval, including the president.  But the 
president did not feel threatened because this man's strength complemented his strength and 
compensated for his weaknesses.  So he had the strength of two people, a complementary team. 
   This man's success was not dependent on his circumstances.  Many others were in the same 
situation.  It was his chosen response to those circum stances, his focus on his Ci rcle of Influence, that 
made the difference.    There are some people who interpret "proactive" to  mean pushy, aggressive, or insensitive; but that 
isn't the case at all.  Proactive people aren't push y.  They're smart, they're value driven, they read 
reality, and they know what's needed.    Look at Gandhi.  While his accusers were in the legislative chambers criticizing him because he 
wouldn't join in their Circle of Concern rhetoric co ndemning the British Empire for their subjugation of 
the Indian people, Gandhi was out in the rice pa ddies, quietly, slowly, imperceptibly expanding his 
Circle of Influence with the field laborers.  A ground  swell of support, of trust, of confidence followed 
him through the countryside.  Though he held no office or political posi tion, through compassion, 
courage, fasting, and moral persua sion he eventually brought England to its knees, breaking political 
domination of 300 million people with the power of  his greatly expanded Circle of Influence. 
 The "Have's" and the "Be's"     One wa
y to determine which circle our concern is in is to distin guish between the have 's and the be's.  
The Circle of Concern is filled with the have's    "I'll be happy when I have my house paid off."    " I f  o n l y  I  h a d  a  b o s s  w h o wasn't such a dictator." 
   "If only I had a more patient husband."    "If I had more obedient kids."    "If I had my degree."    "If I could just have more time to myself."    The Circle of Influence is filled with the be's -- I can be more patient, be wise, be loving.  It's the 
character focus.    Anytime we think the problem is "out there," that  thought is the problem.  We empower what's out 
there to control us.  The change paradigm is "outside -in" -- what's out there ha s to change before we 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
can change. 
   The proactive approach is to change from the In side-Out: to be different, and by being different, to 
effect positive change in what's out there -- I can be  more resourceful, I can be more diligent, I can be 
more creative, I can be more cooperative.    O n e  o f  m y  f a v o r i t e  s t o r i e s  i s  o n e  i n  t h e  O l d  T e s t a m e n t ,  p a r t  o f  t h e  f u n d a m e n t a l  f a b r i c  o f  t h e  Judeo-Christian tradition.  It's the story of Joseph, who was sold into slavery in Egypt by his brothers 
at the age of 17.  Can you imagine how easy it would have been for him to languish in self-pity as a 
servant of Potiphar, to focus on the weaknesses of his brothers and his ca ptors and on all he didn't have? 
But Joseph was proactive.  He worked on be.  An d within a short period of time, he was running 
Potiphar's household.  He was in charge of all that Potiphar had because the trust was so high. 
   Then the day came when Joseph was caught in a difficult situation and refused to compromise his 
integrity.  As a result, he was unjustly imprisoned  for 13 years.  But again he was proactive.  He 
worked on the inner circle, on being instead of having, and soon he was running the prison and 
eventually the entire nation of Eg ypt, second only to the Pharaoh. 
   I know this idea is a dramatic  Paradigm Shift for many people.  It is so much easier to blame other 
people, conditioning, or conditions for our own stagnant situation.  But we are responsible -- 
"response-able" -- to control our lives and to powerful ly influence our circumstances by working on be, 
on what we are.    If I have a problem in my marriage, what do I re ally gain by continually co nfessing my wife's sins? 
By saying I'm not responsible, I make myself a powerless victim; I immobilize myself in a negative 
situation.  I also diminish my ability to influence her -- my nagging, accusing, critical attitude only 
makes her feel validated in her own weakness.  My  criticism is worse than the conduct I want to 
correct.  My ability to positively im pact the situation withers and dies. 
   If I really want to improve my situation, I ca n work on the one thing over which I have control -- 
myself.  I can stop trying to shap e up my wife and work on my own weaknesses.  I can focus on being 
a great marriage partner, a source of unconditional love and support.  Hopefully , my wife will feel the 
power of proactive example and respond in kind.  Bu t whether she does or doesn't, the most positive 
way I can influence my situation is to work on myself, on my being. 
   There are so many ways to work in the Circle of Influence -- to be a better listener, to be a more 
loving marriage partner, to be a better student, to  be a more cooperative and dedicated employee.  
Sometimes the most proactive thing we can do is to be happy, just to genuinely smile.  Happiness, like 
unhappiness, is a proactive choice.  There are things, like the weather, th at our Circle of Influence will 
never include.  But as proactive people, we can carry our own physical or social weather with us.  We 
can be happy and accept those things that at presen t we can't control, while we focus our efforts on the 
things that we can.  The Other End of the Stick     Before we totally shift our life focus to our Circle of Influence, we need to consider two things in our 
Circle of Concern that merit deeper thought -- consequences and mistakes. 
   While we are free to choose our actions, we are not free to choose the consequences of those actions.  
Consequences are governed by natural law.  They are out in the Circle of Conc ern.  We can decide to 
step in front of a fast-moving train, but we canno t decide what will happen when the train hits us. 
   We can decide to be dishonest in our business dealings.  While the social consequences of that 
decision may vary depending on whether or not we are found out, the natural consequences to our 
basic character are a fixed result.    Our behavior is governed by principles.  Living in harmony with them brings positive consequences; violating them brings negative conseq uences.  We are free to choose our response in any 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
situation, but in doing so, we choose the attendant consequence.  "When we pick up one end of the 
stick, we pick up the other."    Undoubtedly, there have been times in each of our lives when we have picked up what we later felt 
was the wrong stick.  Our choices have brought cons equences we would rather have lived without.  If 
we had the choice to make over again, we would make  it differently.  We call these choices mistakes, 
and they are the second thing that merits our deeper thought.    For those filled with regret, perh aps the most needful exercise of pr oactivity is to realize that past 
mistakes are also out there in the Circle of Concer n.  We can't recall them, we can't undo them, we can't 
control the consequences that came as a result.    As a college quarterback, one of my sons learned  to snap his wristband between plays as a kind of 
mental checkoff whenever he or anyone made a "se tting back" mistake, so the last mistake wouldn't 
affect the resolve and execution of the next play.    The proactive approach to a mistake is to acknow ledge it instantly, correct it, and learn from it.  
This literally turns a failure into a success.  "Success," said IBM founder T.  J.  Watson, "is on the far side of failure."    But not to acknowledge a mistake, not to correct it and learn from it, is a mist ake of a different order.  
It usually puts a person on a self-deceiving, self-j ustifying path, often involving rationalization (rational 
lies) to self and to others.  This second mistak e, this cover-up, empowers the first, giving it 
disproportionate importance, and ca uses far deeper injury to self. 
   It is not what others do or even our own mistakes  that hurt us the most; it is our response to those 
things.  Chasing after the poisonous snake that bite s us will only drive the poison through our entire 
system.  It is far better to take measures immediately to get the poison out.    Our response to any mistake affects the quality of  the next moment.  It is important to immediately 
admit and correct our mistakes so that they have  no power over that next moment and we are 
empowered again.  Making and Keeping Commitments     At the very heart of our Circle of Influenc e is our ability to make and keep commitments and 
promises.  The commitments we make to ourselve s and to others, and our integrity to those 
commitments, is the essence and clearest  manifestation of our proactivity. 
   It is also the essence of  our growth.  Through our human endowments of self-awareness and 
conscience, we become conscious of areas of weakness, areas for improvement, areas of talent that could 
be developed, areas that need to be changed or e liminated from our lives.  Then, as we recognize and 
use our imagination and independent will to act on that awareness -- making promises, setting goals, 
and being true to them -- we build the strength of character, the being, that makes possible every other 
positive thing in our lives.    It is here that we find two ways to put ourselve s in control of our lives immediately.  We can make 
a promise -- and keep it.  Or we can set a goal -- and work to achieve it.  As we make and keep 
commitments, even small commitments, we begin to es tablish an inner integr ity that gives us the 
awareness of self-control and the courage and strength  to accept more of the responsibility for our own 
lives.  By making and keeping promises to oursel ves and others, little by little, our honor becomes 
greater than our moods.    The power to make and keep commitments to ours elves is the essence of developing the basic habits 
of effectiveness.  Knowledge, skill, and desire are a ll within our control.  We can work on any one to 
improve the balance of the three.  As the area of intersection becomes larger, we more deeply 
internalize the principles upon which the habits are based and create the strength of character to move 
us in a balanced way toward increasing effectiveness in our lives. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
 
Proactivity:  The 30-Day Test     We don't have to go through the death camp e xperience of Frankl to recognize and develop our own 
proactivity.  It is in the ordinary events of every day that we develop the proactive capacity to handle the extraordinary pressures of life.  It's how we ma ke and keep commitments, how we handle a traffic 
jam, how we respond to an irate customer or a diso bedient child.  It's how we view our problems and 
where we focus our energies.  It's the language we use.    I would challenge you to test the principle of proactivity for 30 days.  Simply try it and see what 
happens.  For 30 days work only in your Circle of Influence.  Make small commitments and keep them.  Be a light, not a judge.  Be a model, not a critic.  Be part of the solution, not part of the 
problem.    Try it in your marriage, in your family, in yo ur job.  Don't argue for other people's weaknesses.  
Don't argue for your own.  When you make a mist ake, admit it, correct it, and learn from it -- 
immediately.  Don't get into a blaming, accusing mode.  Work on things you have control over.  
Work on you.  On be.    Look at the weaknesses of others with compassi on, not accusation.  It's not what they're not doing 
or should be doing that's the issue.  The issue is your own chos en response to the situation and what 
you should be doing.  If you start to think the prob lem is "out there," stop yourself.  That thought is 
the problem.    People who exercise their embryonic freedom day af ter day will, little by little, expand that freedom.  
People who do not will find that it withers until they are literally "being lived." They are acting out the 
scripts written by parents, associates, and society.    We are responsible for our own effectiveness, for our own happiness, and ultimately, I would say, 
for most of our circumstances.    Samuel Johnson observed: "The fountain of conten t must spring up in the mind, and he who hath so 
little knowledge of human nature as to seek happi ness by changing anything but his own disposition, 
will waste his life in fruitless efforts and mu ltiply the grief he proposes to remove." 
   Knowing that we are responsible -- "response-able " -- is fundamental to effectiveness and to every 
other habit of effectiveness we will discuss.  Application Suggestions     1.  For a full day, listen to your language and to the language of the people around you.  How often do you use and hear reactive phrases such  as "If only," "I can't," or "I have to" 
   2.  Identify an experience you might encounter in the near future where, based on past experience, 
you would probably behave reactively.  Review the situat ion in the context of your Circle of Influence.  
How could you respond proactively? Take several mo ments and create the experience vividly in your 
mind, picturing yourself responding in a proactive manner.  Remind yourself of the gap between stimulus and response.  Make a commitment to yourself to exercise your freedom to choose.    3.  Select a problem from your work or personal  life that is frustrating to you.  Determine whether 
it is a direct, indirect, or no control problem.  Iden tify the first step you can take in your Circle of 
Influence to solve it and then take that step.    4.  Try the 30-day test of proactivity.  Be aw are of the change in your Circle of Influence.