T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
end and the means are the same. 
   Win-win is not a personality technique.  It's a total paradigm of human interaction.  It comes from 
a character of integrity, maturity, and the Abunda nce Mentality.  It grows out of high-trust 
relationships.  It is embodied in agreements that effectively clarify and manage expectations as well as 
accomplishments.  It thrives in supportive systems.   And it is achieved through the process we are 
now prepared to more fully examine in Habits 5 and 6.  Application Suggestions:     1.  Think about an upcoming interaction wherei n you will be attempting to reach an agreement or 
negotiate a solution.  Commit to maintain a balance between courage and consideration. 
   2.  Make a list of obstacles that keep you fr om applying the win-win paradigm more frequently.  
Determine what could be done within your Circle of  Influence to eliminate some of those obstacles. 
   3.  Select a specific relationship where you would like to develop a Win- Win Agreement.  Try to 
put yourself in the other person's place, and write down explicitly ho w you think that person sees the 
solution.  Then list, from your own perspective,  what results would constitute a win for you.  
Approach the other person and ask if he or she would be willing to communicate until you reach a 
point of agreement and mutually beneficial solution.    4.  Identify three key relationships in your life.  Give some indication of what you feel the balance 
is in each of the Emotional Bank Accounts.  Write down some specific ways you could make deposits 
in each account.    5.  Deeply consider your own scripting.  Is it win-lose?  How does that scripting affect your 
interactions with other people?  Can you identify th e main source of that script?  Determine whether 
or not those scripts serve well in your current reality.    6.  Try to identify a model of win-win thinking who, even in hard situat ions, really seeks mutual 
benefit.  Determine now to more closely wa tch and learn from this person's example. 
 
Habit 5:  Seek First to Understand, Then to Be Understood TM 
 Principles of Empathic Communication     The heart has its reasons which reason knows not of. 
    - -  P a s c a l  
 
   Suppose you've been having troubl e with your eyes and you decide to go to an optometrist for help.  
After briefly listening to your complaint, he takes off his glasses and hands them to you. 
   "Put these on," he says.  "I've worn this pair of glasses for 10 years now and they've really helped 
me.  I have an extra pair at home; you can wear these."    So you put them on, but it only makes the problem worse    "This is terrible!" you exclaim.  "I can't see a thing!"    "Well, what's wrong?" he asks.  "They work great for me.  Try harder."    "I am trying," you insist.  "Everything is a blur."    "Well, what's the matter with you? Think positively."    "Okay.  I positively can't see a thing."    "Boy, you are ungrateful!" he chides.  "And after all I've done to help you!"    What are the chances you'd go back to that op tometrist the next time you need help?  Not very 
good, I would imagine.  You don't have much confid ence in someone who doesn't diagnose before he 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
or she prescribes. 
   But how often do we diagnose before we prescribe in communication?    "Come on, honey, tell me how you feel.  I know it's hard, but I'll try to understand." 
   "Oh, I don't know, Mom.  You'd think it was stupid."    "Of course I wouldn't!  You can tell me.  Honey,  no one cares for you as much as I do.  I'm only 
interested in your welfare.  What's making you so unhappy?"    "Oh, I don't know."    "Come on, honey.  What is it?"    "Well, to tell you the truth, I just don't like school anymore."    "What?" you respond incredulously.  "What do you mean you don't like school?  And after all the sacrifices we've made for your education!  Education is the foundation of your  future.  If you'd apply 
yourself like your older sister does, you'd do better and then you'd like school.  Time and time again, 
we've told you to settle down.  You've got the ability, but you just don't apply yourself.  Try harder.  Get a positive attitude about it."    Pause    "Now go ahead.  Tell me how you feel."    We have such a tendency to rush in, to fix thin gs up with good advice.  But we often fail to take the 
time to diagnose, to really, deep ly understand the problem first. 
   If I were to summarize in one sentence the single  most important principle I have learned in the field 
of interpersonal relations, it would be this: Seek First to Understand, Then to Be Understood.  This 
principle is the key to effective interpersonal communication.  Character and Communication     Right now, you're reading a book I've wri tten.  Reading and writing are both forms of 
communication.  So are speaking and listening.  In fact, those are the four basic types of 
communication.  And think of all the hours you spen d doing at least one of those four things.  The 
ability to do them well is absolutely  critical to your effectiveness. 
   Communication is the most important skill in life.  We spend most  of our waking hours 
communicating.  But consider this: You've spent years  learning how to read and write, years learning 
how to speak.  But what about listening?  What t raining or education have you had that enables you 
to listen so that you really, deeply understand an other human being from that individual's own frame 
of reference?    Comparatively few people have had any training in  listening at all.  And, for the most part, their 
training has been in the personality ethic of te chnique, truncated from the character base and the 
relationship base absolutely vital to au thentic understanding of another person. 
   If you want to interact effectively with me, to in fluence me -- your spouse, yo ur child, your neighbor, 
your boss, your coworker, your friend -- you first n eed to understand me.  And you can't do that with 
technique alone.  If I sense you're using some tec hnique, I sense duplicity, manipulation.  I wonder 
why you're doing it, what your motives are.  And I don' t feel safe enough to open myself up to you. 
   The real key to your influence with me is your example, your actual conduct.  Your example flows naturally out of your character, of th e kind of person you truly are --  not what others say you are or 
what you may want me to think you are.  It is  evident in how I actually experience you. 
   Your character is constantly radiating, communi cating.  From it, in the long run, I come to 
instinctively trust or distrust you and your efforts with me.    If your life runs hot and cold , if you're both caustic and kind, and, above all, if your private 
performance doesn't square with your public performance, it's very hard for me to open up with you.  
Then, as much as I may want and even  need to receive your love and in fluence, I don't feel safe enough 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
to expose my opinions and experiences and my tender feelings.  Who knows what will happen? 
   But unless I open up with you,  unless you understand me and my unique situation and feelings, you 
won't know how to advise or counsel me.  What you say is good and fine, but it doesn't quite pertain to me.    You may say you care about and appreciate me.  I desperately want to believe that.  But how can 
you appreciate me when you don't even understand me?  All I have are your words, and I can't trust 
words.    I'm too angry and defensive -- perhaps too guilty an d afraid -- to be influenced, even though inside I 
know I need what you could tell me.    Unless you're influenced by my uniqueness, I'm no t going to be influenced by your advice.  So if 
you want to be really effective in the habit of interpersonal communication, you cannot do it with technique alone.  You have to build the skills of empa thic listening on a base of character that inspires 
openness and trust.  And you have to build the Em otional Bank Accounts that create a commerce 
between hearts.  Empathic Listening     "Seek first to understand" involves a very deep shift in paradigm.  We typically seek first to be 
understood.  Most people do not listen with the intent to understand; they listen with the intent to reply.  They're either speaking or preparing to sp eak.  They're filtering ev erything through their own 
paradigms, reading their autobiography into other people's lives.    "Oh, I know exactly how you feel!"    "I went through the very same thing.   Let me tell you about my experience." 
   They're constantly projecting their own home mo vies onto other people's behavior.  They prescribe 
their own glasses for everyone with whom they interact.    If they have a problem with someone -- a son, a daughter, a spouse, an employee -- their attitude is, 
"That person just doesn't understand."    A father once told me, "I can't understand my kid.  He just won't listen to me at all." 
   "Let me restate what you just said," I replied.   "You don't understand your son because he won't 
listen to you?"    "That's right," he replied.    "Let me try again," I said.  "You don't unde rstand your son because he won't listen to you?" 
   "That's what I said," he impatiently replied.    "I thought that to understand another pers on, you needed to listen to him," I suggested. 
   "OH!" he said.  There was a long pause.  "Oh!" he said again, as the light began to dawn.  "Oh, yeah! But I do understand him.  I know what he 's going through.  I went through the same thing 
myself.  I guess what I don't understa nd is why he won't listen to me." 
   This man didn't have the vaguest idea of what  was really going on inside his boy's head.  He 
looked into his own head and thought he saw the world, including his boy.    That's the case with so many  of us.  We're filled with our own rightness, our own autobiography.  
We want to be understood.  Our conversations become collective monologues, and we never really understand what's going on inside another human being.    When another person speaks, we're usually "liste ning" at one of four leve ls.  We may be ignoring 
another person, not really listening at all.  We ma y practice pretending.  "Y eah.  Uh-huh.  Right."  
We may practice selective listening, hearing only ce rtain parts of the constant chatter of a preschool 
child.  Or we may even practice attentive listening, paying attention and focusing energy on the words 
that are being said.  But very few of us ever prac tice the fifth level, the highest form of listening, 
empathic listening. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   When I say empathic listening, I am not referring to  the techniques of "active" listening or "reflective" 
listening, which basically involve mimicking what an other person says.  That  kind of listening is 
skill-based, truncated from character and relationship, and often insults those "listened" to in such a 
way.  It is also essentially autobiographical.  If  you practice those techni ques, you may not project 
your autobiography in the actual interaction, but yo ur motive in listening is  autobiographical.  You 
listen with reflective skills, but you listen with intent to reply, to control, to manipulate. 
   When I say empathic listening, I mean listening with in tent to understand.  I mean seeking first to 
understand, to really understand.  It's an entirely different paradigm.    Empathic (from empathy) listening gets inside another person's frame of reference.  You look out 
through it, you see the world the way they see the world, you understand their paradigm, you 
understand how they feel.    Empathy is not sympathy.  Sympathy is a form  of agreement, a form of judgment.  And it is 
sometimes the more appropriate emotion and respon se.  But people often feed on sympathy.  It 
makes them dependent.  The essence of empathic listeni ng is not that you agree with someone; it's that 
you fully, deeply, understand that person , emotionally as well as intellectually. 
   Empathic listening in volves much more than registering, reflecting, or even understanding the 
words that are said.  Communications experts es timate, in fact, that only 10 percent of our 
communication is represented by the words we say.  Another 30 percent is represented by our sounds, 
and 60 percent by our body language.  In empathic listening, you listen with your ears, but you also, 
and more importantly, listen with your eyes and with  your heart.  You listen for feeling, for meaning.  
You listen for behavior.  You use your right brain as well as your left.  You sense, you intuit, you feel. 
   Empathic listening is so powerful because it gives you accurate data to work with.  Instead of 
projecting your own autobiography and assuming thou ght, feelings, motives, and interpretation, you're 
dealing with the reality inside another person's head and heart.  You're listening to understand.  
You're focused on receiving the deep communication of another human soul. 
   In addition, empathic listening is the key to making deposits in Emotional Bank Accounts, because 
nothing you do is a deposit unless the other person pe rceives it as such.  You can work your fingers to 
the bone to make a deposit, only to have it turn in to a withdrawal when a pers on regards your efforts as 
manipulative, self-serving, intimidating, or conde scending because you don't understand what really 
matters to him.    Empathic listening is, in and of itself, a tremendous deposit in the Emotional Bank Account.  It's 
deeply therapeutic and healing because it gives a person "psychological air.    If all the air were suddenly sucked out of the r oom you're in right now, what would happen to your 
interest in this book?  You wouldn't care about the book; you wouldn't care about anything except 
getting air.  Survival would be your only motivation.    But now that you have air, it doesn't motivate you.  This is one of the greatest insights in the field of 
human motivations: Satisfied needs do not motivate.  It's only the unsatisfied need that motivates.  
Next to physical survival, the greatest need of a human being is psychological survival -- to be understood, to be affirmed, to be validated, to be appreciated.    When you listen with empathy to another pers on, you give that person psychological air.  And 
after that vital need is met, you can then  focus on influencing or problem solving. 
   This need for psychological air impa cts communication in every area of life. 
   I taught this concept at a seminar in Chicago on e time, and I instructed the participants to practice 
empathic listening during the evening.  The next mo rning, a man came up to me almost bursting with 
news.    "Let me tell you what happened last night," he said.  "I was trying to close a big commercial real 
estate deal while I was here in Chicago.  I met wi th the principals, their attorneys, and another real 
estate agent who had just been brough t in with an alternative proposal. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   "It looked as if I were going to lose the deal.  I had been working on this deal for over six months 
and, in a very real sense, all my eggs were in th is one basket.  All of them.  I panicked.  I did 
everything I could -- I pulled out all the stops -- I used every sales technique I could.  The final stop was to say, 'Could we delay this decision just a little longer?'  But the momentum was so strong and 
they were so disgusted by having this thing go on so long, it was obvious they were going to close. 
   "So I said to myself, 'Well, why not try it?  Wh y not practice what I learned today and seek first to 
understand, then to be understood?  I've got nothing to lose.'    " I  j u s t  s a i d  t o  t h e  m a n ,  ' L e t  m e  s e e  i f  I  r e a l l y  u n d e r s t a n d  w h a t  y o u r  p o s i t i o n  i s  a n d  w h a t  y o u r  concerns about my recommendations really are.  Wh en you feel I understand them, then we'll see 
whether my proposal has any relevance or not.'    "I really tried to put myself in his shoes.  I tried to verbalize his needs and concerns, and he began 
to open up.    "The more I sensed and expressed the things he  was worried about, the results he anticipated, the 
more he opened up.    "Finally, in the middle of our conversation, he stood up, walked over to the phone, and dialed his 
wife.  Putting his hand over the mouthp iece, he said, 'You've got the deal.' 
   "I was totally dumbfounded," he told me.  "I still am this morning.    He had made a huge deposit in the Emotional Bank Account by giving the man psychological air.  
When it comes right down to it, other things be ing relatively equal, the human dynamic is more 
important than the technical dimensions of the deal.    Seeking first to understand, diagnosing before yo u prescribe, is hard.  It's so much easier in the 
short run to hand someone a pair of glasses that have fit you so well these many years. 
   But in the long run, it severely deplet es both P and PC.  You can't achieve maximum 
interdependent production from an inaccurate unders tanding of where other people are coming from.  
And you can't have interpersonal PC -- high Emotional Bank Accounts -- if the people you relate with 
don't really feel understood.    Empathic listening is also risky.  It takes a great deal of security to go into a deep listening 
experience because you open yourself  up to be influenced.  You become vulnerable.  It's a paradox, in 
a sense, because in order to have influence, you have  to be influenced.  That means you have to really 
understand.    That's why Habits 1, 2, and 3 are so foundation al.  They give you the changeless inner core, the 
principle center, from which you can handle the mo re outward vulnerability with peace and strength. 
 Diagnose Before You Prescribe     Although it's risky and hard, s eek first to understand, or diagnose before you prescribe, is a correct 
principle manifesting many areas of lif e.  It's the mark of all true prof essionals.  It's critical for the 
optometrist, it's critical for the physician.  You woul dn't have any confidence in a doctor's prescription 
unless you had confidence in the diagnosis    When our daughter Jenny was only two months ol d, she was sick on Saturday, the day of a football 
game in our community that dominated the consciou sness of almost everyone.  It was an important 
game -- some 60,000 people were there.  Sandra and I wo uld like to have gone, but we didn't want to 
leave little Jenny.  Her vomiting and diarrhea had us concerned    The doctor was at that game.  He wasn't our pe rsonal physician, but he was the one on call.  When 
Jenny's situation got worse, we decided we needed some medical advice    Sandra dialed the stadium and had him paged.  It  was right at a critical time in the game, and she 
could sense on officious tone in his voice.  "Yes?" he said briskly.  "What is it?" 
   "This is Mrs. Covey, Doctor, and we're concerned about our daughter, Jenny." 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   "What's the situation?" he asked. 
   Sandra described the symptoms and he said, "Ok ay.  I'll call in a prescription.  Which is your 
pharmacy?"    When she hung up, Sandra felt that in her rush she hadn't really given him full data, but that what 
she had told him was adequate.    "Do you think he realizes that Jenny is just a newborn?" I asked her 
   "I'm sure he does," Sandra replied.    "But he's not our doctor.  He's never even treated her."    "Well, I'm pretty sure he knows."    "Are you willing to give her the medicine  unless you're absolutely sure he knows?" 
   Sandra was silent.  "What are we going to do?" she finally said. 
   "Call him back," I said.    "You call him back," Sandra replied.    So I did.  He was paged out of the game once again.  "Doctor," I said, "when you called in that prescription, did  your realize that Jenny is just two months old?"    "No!" he exclaimed.  "I didn't realize that .  It's good you called me back.  I'll change the 
prescription immediately."    If you don't have confidence in the diagnosi s, you won't have confidence in the prescription. 
   This principle is also true in sales.  An effect ive salesperson first seeks to understand the needs, the 
concerns, the situation of the customer.  The amateu r salesman sells products; the professional sells 
solutions to needs and problems.  It's a totally di fferent approach.  The professional learns how to 
diagnose, how to understand.  He also learns how to re late people's needs to his products and services.  
And, he has to have the integrity to say, "My produc t or service will not meet that need" if it will not. 
   Diagnosing before you prescribe is also fundamen tal to law.  The professional lawyer first gathers 
the facts to understand the situation, to understand  the laws and precedents, before preparing a case.  
A good lawyer almost writes the opposing a ttorney's case before he writes his own. 
   It's also true in product design.  Can you imagine someone in a compan y saying, "This consumer 
research stuff is for the birds.  Let's design produc ts."  In other words, forget understanding the 
consumer's buying habits and motives -- just  design products.  It would never work. 
   A good engineer will understand the forces, th e stresses at work, before designing the bridge.  A 
good teacher will assess the class before teaching.  A good student will understand before he applies.  
A good parent will understand before evaluation  or judging.  The key to good judgment is 
understanding.  By judging first, a person will never fully understand. 
   Seek first to understand is a correct principl e evident in all areas of life.  It's a generic, 
common-denominator principle, but it has its greate st power in the area of interpersonal relations. 
 Four Autobiographical Responses     Because we listen autobiographically, we tend to respond in one of four ways.  We evaluate -- we 
either agree or disagree; we probe -- we ask question s from our own frame of reference; we advise -- we 
give counsel based on our own experience; or we interp ret -- we try to figure people out, to explain their 
motives, their behavior, based on our own motives and behavior.    These responses come naturally to us.  We are  deeply scripted in them; we live around models of 
them all the time.  But how do they a ffect our ability to really understand? 
   If I'm trying to communicate with my son, can he  feel free to open himself up to me when I evaluate 
everything he says before he really explains it?  Am I giving him psychological air?    And how does he feel when I probe?  Probing is playing 20 questions.  It's autobiographical, it 
controls, and it invades.  It's also logical, and the language of logic is different from the language of 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
sentiment and emotion.  You can play 20 question s all day and not find out what's important to 
someone.  Constant probing is one of the main re asons parents do not get close to their children. 
   "How's it going, son?"    " F i n e . "     "Well, what's been happening lately?"    "Nothing."    "So what's exciting at school?"    " N o t  m u c h . "     "And what are your plans for the weekend?"    "I don't know."    You can't get him off the phone talking with his friends, but all he gives you is one- and two-word 
answers.  Your house is a motel where he eats and sleeps, but he never shares, never opens up.    And when you think about it, honestly, why shou ld he, if every time he does open up his soft 
underbelly, you elephant stomp it with auto biographical advice and "I told you so's." 
   We are so deeply scripted in these responses th at we don't even realize when we use them.  I have 
taught this concept to thousands of people in semi nars across the country, and it never fails to shock 
them deeply as we role-play empathic listening situat ions and they finally begin to listen to their own 
typical responses.  But as they begin to see how they normally respond and learn how to listen with 
empathy, they can see the dramatic results in comm unication.  To many, seek first to understand 
becomes the most exciting, the most immedi ately applicable, of all the Seven Habits. 
   Let's take a look at what well might be a typ ical communication between a father and his teenage 
son.  Look at the father's words in terms of th e four different responses we have just described. 
   "Boy, Dad, I've had it!  School is for the birds!"    "What's the matter, Son?" (probing).    "It's totally impractical.  I don't get a thing out of  it."    "Well, you just can't see the benefits yet, So n.  I felt the same way when I was your age."  I 
remember thinking what a waste some  of the classes were.  But those classes turned out to be the most 
helpful to me later on.  Just hang in there.  Give it some time" (advising).    "I've given it 10 years of  my lif e!  Can you tell me what  good 'x pl us y' is going to be to me as an 
auto mechanic?"    "An auto mechanic?  You've got to be kidding" (evaluating).    "No, I'm not.  Look at Joe.  He's quit school.  He's working on cars.  And he's making lots of money.  Now that's practical."    "It may look that way now.  But several years down the road, Joe's going to wish he'd stayed in 
school.  You don't want to be an auto mechanic.  You need an educ ation to prepare you for something 
better than that" (advising).    "I don't know.  Joe's got a pretty good set-up."    "Look, Son, have you really tried?" (probing, evaluating).    "I've been in high school  two years now.  Sure I've tried.  It's just a waste." 
   "That's a highly respected school, Son.  Give them a little credit" (advising, evaluating).    "Well, the other guys feel the same way I do."    "Do you realize how many sacrifices your moth er and I have made to get you to where you are?  
You can't quit when you've come this far" (evaluating).    "I know you've sacrificed, Dad.  But it's just not worth it."    "Look, maybe if you spent more time doing your homework and less time in front of TV." (advising, 
evaluating).    "Look, Dad.  It's just no good.  Oh, never mind!  I don't want to talk about this anyway." 
   Obviously, his father was well-intended.  Obviousl y, he wanted to help.  But did he even begin to 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
really understand? 
   Let's look more carefully at the son -- not just  his words, but his thoughts and feelings (expressed 
parenthetically below) and the possible effect of  some of his dad's autobiographical responses. 
   "Boy, Dad, I've had it! School is for the birds!" (I want to talk with you, to get your attention.) 
   "What's the matter, Son?"  (You're interested! Good!)    "It's totally impractical.  I don't get a thing out of  it."  (I've got a problem wi th school, and I feel just 
terrible.    "Well, you just can't see the benefits yet, son.  I felt the same way when I was your age."  (Oh, no!  
Here comes Chapter three of Dad's autobiography.  This isn't what I want to talk about.  I don't really 
care how many miles he had to trudge through the sn ow to school without any boots.  I want to get to 
the problem.)  "I remember thinking what a waste so me of the classes were.  But those classes turned 
out to be the most helpful to me later on.  Just hang in there.  Give it some time."  (Time won't solve 
my problem.  I wish I could tell you.  I wish I could just spit it out.)    "I've given it 10 years of my life!  Can you tell me what good 'x plus y' is going to do me as an auto 
mechanic?"    "An auto mechanic?  You've got to be kidding."  ( He wouldn't like me if I were an auto mechanic.  
He wouldn't like me if I didn't finish school.  I have to justify what I said.) 
   "No, I'm not.  Look at Joe.  He's quit school.  He's working on cars.  And he's making lots of money.  Now that's practical."    "It may look that way now.  But several years down the road, Joe's going to wish he'd stayed in 
school."  (Oh, Boy!  here comes lecture number 16 on  the value of an education.)  "You don't want to 
be an auto mechanic."  (How do you know that, Dad?  Do you really have any idea what I want?)  "You need an education to prepare you for something better than that." 
   "I don't know.  Joe's got a pretty good set-up."   (He's not a failure.  He didn't finish school and 
he's not a failure.)    "Look, Son, have you really tried?"  (We're be ating around the bush, Dad.  If you'd just listen, I 
really need to talk to you about something important.)    "I've been in high school  two years now.  Sure I've tried.  It's just a waste." 
   "That's a highly respected school, Son.  Give them  a little credit."   (Oh, great.  Now we're talking 
credibility.  I wish I could talk about what I want to talk about.)    "Well, the other guys feel the same way I do."  (I have some credibility, too.  I'm not a moron.) 
   "Do you realize how many sacrifices your moth er and I have made to get you where you are?"  
(Uh-oh, here comes the guilt trip.  Maybe I am a mo ron.  The school's great, Mom and Dad are great, 
and I'm a moron.)   "You can't quit when you've come this far."    "I know you've sacrificed, Dad.  But it's ju st not worth it."  (You just don't understand.) 
   "Look, maybe if you spent more time doing your homework and less time in front of TV..."  (That's 
not the problem, Dad!  That's not it at all!  I' ll never be able to tell you.  I was dumb to try.) 
   "Look, Dad.  It's just no good.  Oh, never mind!  I don't want to talk about this anyway." 
   Can you see how limited we are when we try to understand another person  on the basis of words 
alone, especially when we're lo oking at that person through ou r own glasses?  Can you see how 
limiting our autobiographical responses are to a person who is genuinely trying to get us to understand 
his autobiography?    You will never be able to truly step inside anot her person, to see the world as he sees it, until you 
develop the pure desire, the stren gth of personal character, and the positive Emotional Bank Account, 
as well as the empathic listening skills to do it.    The skills, the tip of the iceberg of empath ic listening, involve four developmental stages 
   The first and least effective is to mimic content.  This is the skill taught in "active" or "reflective" 
listening.  Without the character and relationship base, it is often insulting to people and causes them 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
to close up.  It is, however, a first-stage skill because it  at least causes you to listen to what's being said 
   Mimicking content is easy.  You just listen to the words that come out of  someone's mouth and you 
repeat them.  You're hardly even using your brain at all    "Boy, Dad, I've had it!  School is for the birds!"    "You've had it.  You think school is for the birds."    You have essentially repeated back the content of what was being said.  You haven't evaluated or 
probed or advised or interpreted.  You've at least showed you're paying attention to his words.  But 
to understand, you want to do more.    The second stage of empathic listening is to rephras e the content.  It's a little more effective, but it's 
still limited to the verbal communication    "Boy, Dad, I've had it!  School is for the birds!"    "You don't want to go to school anymore."    This time, you've put his meaning into your ow n words.  Now you're thinking about what he said, 
mostly with the left side, the reas oning, logical side of the brain. 
   The third stage brings your right brain into operation.  You reflect feeling.    "Boy, Dad, I've had it!  School is for the birds!"    "You're feeling really frustrated."    Now you're not paying as much attention to what he's saying as you are to the way he feels about what he's saying.  The fourth stage includes both the second and the third.  You rephrase the content 
and reflect the feeling.    "Boy, Dad, I've had it!  School is for the birds!"    "You're really frustrated about school."    Frustration is the feeling; school is the content.  You're using both sides of your brain to understand 
both sides of his communication.    Now, what happens when you us e fourth stage empathic listening sk ills is really incredible.  As 
you authentically seek to understand, as you re phrase content and reflect feeling, you give him 
psychological air.  You also help him work through his own thoughts and feelings.  As he grows in 
his confidence of your sincere desire to really lis ten and understand, the barrier between what's going 
on inside him and what's actually being communicated to you disappears.  It opens a soul-to-soul flow.  
He's not thinking and feeling one thing and communica ting another.  He begins to trust you with his 
innermost tender feelings and thoughts.    "Boy, Dad, I've  had it!  School is for the birds!"  (I want to talk with you to get your attention.)    "You're really frustrated about school."   (That's right!  That's how I feel.) 
   "I sure am.  It's totally impractica l.  I'm not getting a thing out of it." 
   "You feel like school's not doing you any good ."  (Let me think -- is that what I mean?) 
   "Well, yeah.  I'm just not learning anything that 's going to help me.  I mean, look at Joe.  He's 
dropped out of school and he's working on cars.  He's making money.  Now that's practical." 
   "You feel that Joe really has the right idea."  (Well...)    "Well, I guess he does in a way.  He's really  making money now.  But in a few years I bet he'll 
probably be ticked off at himself."    "You think Joe's going to f eel he made the wrong decision." 
   "He's got to.  Just look at what he's giving up .  I mean, if you don't have an education, you just 
can't make it in this world."    "Education is really important."    "Oh, yeah!  I mean, if you don't have a diploma, if  you can't get jobs or go to college, what are you 
going to do?  You've just got to get an education."    "It's important to your future."    "It is.  And, you know what?  I'm really worried.  Listen, you won't tell Mom, will you?" 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   "You don't want your mother to find out." 
   "Well, not really.  Oh, I guess you can tell her.  She'll probably find out anyway.  Look, I took this 
test today, this reading test.  And, Dad, they said I'm reading on a fourth-grade level.  Fourth grade!  
And I'm in junior high school!"    What a difference real understanding can make !  All the well-meaning advice in the world won't 
amount to a hill of beans if we're  not even addressing the real problem.  And we'll never get to the 
problem if we're so caught up in our own autobi ography, our own paradigms, that we don't take off 
our glasses long enough to see the world from another point of view.    "I'm going to flunk, Dad.  I guess I figure if I'm going to flunk, I might as well quit.  But I don't 
want to quit."    "You feel torn.  You're in the middle of a dilemma."    "What do you think I should do, Dad?"    By seeking first to understand, this father has just turned a transact ional opportunity into a 
transformational opportunity.  Instead of interacting on a surf ace, get-the-job-done level of 
communication, he has created a situ ation in which he can now have transforming impact, not only on 
his son but also on the relationsh ip.  By setting aside his own auto biography and really seeking to 
understand, he has made a tremendous deposit in the Emotional Bank Account and has empowered his 
son to open, layer upon layer, and to get to the real issue.    Now father and son are on the same side of the table looking at the problem, instead of on opposite 
sides looking across at each other.  The son is op ening his father's autobiography and asking for 
advice.    Even as the father begins to counsel, however, he needs to be sensitive to his son's communication.  
As long as the response is logical, the father can effectively ask questions an d give counsel.  But the 
moment the response becomes emotional, he needs to go back to empathic listening. 
   "Well, I can see some things  you might want to consider." 
   "Like what, Dad?"    "Like getting some special help with your re ading.  Maybe they have some kind of tutoring 
program over at the tech school."    "I've already checked into that.  It takes two nights and all day Saturday.  That would take so much time!"    Sensing emotion in that reply, the father moves back to empathy. 
   "That's too much of a price to pay."    "Besides, Dad, I told the sixth graders I'd be their coach."    "You don't want to let them down."    "But I'll tell you this, Dad.  If I really though t that tutoring course would help, I'd be down there 
every night.  I'd get someone else to coach those kids."    "You really want the help, but you doubt if the course will make a difference."    "Do you think it would, Dad?"    The son is once more open and logical.  He's  opening his father's auto biography again.  Now the 
father has another opportunity to influence and transform. 
   There are times when transformation requires no  outside counsel.  Often when people are really 
given the chance to open up, they  unravel their own problems and the solutions become clear to them 
in the process.    At other times, they really need additional pe rspective and help.  The key is to genuinely seek the 
welfare of the individual, to listen with empathy, to let the person get to the pr oblem and the solution at 
his own pace and time.  Layer upon layer -- it's lik e peeling an onion until you get to the soft inner 
core.  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   When people are really hurting and you really listen with a pure desire  to understand, you'll be 
amazed how fast they will open up.  They want to open up.  Children desperately want to open up, 
even more to their parents than to their peers.  And they will, if they feel their parents will love them 
unconditionally and will be faithful to them afterwards and not judge or ridicule them. 
   If you really seek to understand, without hypo crisy and without guile, there will be times when you 
will be literally stunned with the pure knowledge and understanding that will flow to you from another 
human being.  It isn't even always necessary to talk  in order to empathize.  In fact, sometimes words 
may just get in your way.  That's one very import ant reason why technique alone will not work.  That 
kind of understanding transcends technique.  Isolated technique only gets in the way. 
   I have gone through the skills of  empathic listening because skill is an important part of any habit.  
We need to have the skills.  But let me reiterate th at the skills will not be effective unless they come 
from a sincere desire to understand.  People resent any attempt to manipulate them.  In fact, if you're 
dealing with people you're close to, it's helpful to tell them what you're doing. 
   "I read this book about listening and empathy and I thought about my rela tionship with you.  I 
realized I haven't listened to you like I should.  But I wa nt to.  It's hard for me.  I may blow it at times, 
but I'm going to work at it.  I really care about you and I want to understand.  I hope you'll help me."  
Affirming your motive is a huge deposit.    But if you're not sincere, I wouldn't even try it .  It may create an openness and a vulnerability that 
will later turn to your harm when a person discovers that you really didn't care, you really didn't want 
to listen, and he's left open, exposed, and hurt.  The technique, the tip of the ic eberg, has to come out of 
the massive base of character underneath.    Now there are people who protest that empathic listening takes too much time.  It may take a little 
more time initially but it saves so much time do wnstream.  The most effici ent thing you can do if 
you're a doctor and want to prescribe a wise treatment is to make an accurate di agnosis.  You can't say, 
"I'm in too much of a hurry.  I don't have time to make a diagnosis.  Just take this treatment." 
   I remember writing one time in a room on th e north shore of Oahu, Hawaii.  There was a soft 
breeze blowing, and so I had opened  two windows -- one at the front an d one at the side -- to keep the 
room cool.  I had a number of papers laid out, chapter by chapter, on a large table.    Suddenly, the breeze started picking up and bl owing my papers about.  I remember the frantic 
sense of loss I felt because things were no longer in order, including unnumb ered pages, and I began 
rushing around the room trying desperately to put them  back.  Finally, I realized it would be better to 
take 10 seconds and close one of the windows.    Empathic listening takes time, bu t it doesn't take anywhere near as much time as it takes to back up 
and correct misunderstandings when you're alread y miles down the road, to redo, to live with 
unexpressed  and unsolved problems, to deal with the results of not giving people psychological air. 
   A discerning empathic listener can read what's  happening down deep fast, and can show such 
acceptance, such understanding, that other people feel safe to open up layer after layer until they get to 
that soft inner core where the problem really lies.    People want to be understood.  And whatever in vestment of time it takes to do that will bring 
much greater returns of time as you work from an  accurate understanding of the problems and issues 
and from the high Emotional Bank Account that results when a person feels deeply understood. 
 Understanding and Perception     As you learn to listen deeply to other pe ople, you will discover tremendous differences in 
perception.  You will also begin to appreciate the impact that these differences can have as people try to work together in interdependent situations.    You see the young woman; I see the ol d lady.  And both of us can be right. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   You may look at the world through spouse-centered glasses; I may see it through the 
money-centered lens of economic concern.    You may be scripted in the Abundance Mentali ty; I may be scripted in the Scarcity Mentality. 
   You may approach problems from a highly visual , intuitive, holistic right-brain paradigm; I may be 
very left brain, very sequential, an alytical, and verbal in my approach. 
   Our perceptions can be vastly different.  And ye t we both have lived with our paradigms for years, 
thinking they are "facts," and questioning the charac ter or the mental competence of anyone who can't 
"see the facts."    Now, with all our differences, we're trying to  work together -- in a m arriage, in a job, in a 
community service project -- to manage resources and accomplish results.  So how do we do it?  How 
do we transcend the limits of our in dividual perceptions so that we ca n deeply communicate, so that we 
can cooperatively deal with the issues  and come up with win-win solutions? 
   The answer is Habit 5.  It's the first step in th e process of win-win.  Even if (and especially when) 
the other person is not coming from th at paradigm, seek first to understand. 
   This principle worked powerfully for one exec utive who shared with me the following experience. 
   "I was working with a small company that was in  the process of negotiating a contract with a large 
national banking institution.  This institution flew in their lawyers from San Francisco, their negotiator 
from Ohio, and presidents of two of  their large banks to create an eight-person negotiating team.  The 
company I worked with had decided to go for Win- Win or No Deal.  They wanted to significantly 
increase the level of service and the cost, but they  had been almost overwhelmed with the demands of 
this large financial institution.    "The president of our compan y sat across the negotiating table and told them, 'We would like for 
you to write the contract the way you want it so that we can make sure we un derstand your needs and 
your concerns.  We will respond to those needs and concerns.  Then we can talk about pricing.' 
   "The members of the negotiating team were ov erwhelmed.  They were astounded that they were 
going to have the opportunity to write the contract.  They took three days to come up with the idea. 
   "When they presented it, the president said, 'Now  let's make sure we understand what you want.'  
And he went down the contract, rephrasing the conten t, reflecting the feeling, until he was sure and 
they were sure he understood what was important to th em.  'Yes.  That's right.  No, that's not exactly 
what we meant here...yes, you've got it now.'    "When he thoroughly understood their perspectiv e, he proceeded to explain some concerns from his 
perspective.  .  .and they listened.  They were read y to listen.  They weren't fighting for air.  What 
had started out as a very formal, low-trust, almo st hostile atmosphere had turned into a fertile 
environment for synergy.    "At the conclusion of the discussions, the memb ers of the negotiating team  basically said, 'We want 
to work with you.  We want to do this deal.  Just let us know what the price is and we'll sign.'" 
Then Seek to Be Understood    Seek First to Understand, Then to be Understood .  Knowing how to be understood is the other half 
of Habit 5, and is equally critical in reaching win-win solutions.    Earlier we defined maturity as the balance be tween courage and consideration.  Seeking to 
understand requires consideration; seeking to be un derstood takes courage.  Win-win requires a high 
degree of both.  So it becomes important in inte rdependent situations for us to be understood. 
   The early Greeks had a magnificent philosophy wh ich is embodied in three sequentially arranged 
words: ethos, pathos, and logos.  I suggest these three words contain the esse nce of seeking first to 
understand and making effective presentations.    Ethos is your personal credibility, the faith peop le have in your integrity and competency.  It's the 
trust that you inspire, your Emotional Bank Account.  Pathos is the empathic side -- it's the feeling.  It 
means that you are in alignment with the emotional tr ust of another person's communication.  Logos is 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
the logic, the reasoning part of the presentation. 
   Notice the sequence: ethos, pathos, logos -- your character, and your rela tionships, and then the 
logic of your presentation.  This represents anothe r major Paradigm Shift.  Most people, in making 
presentations, go straight to the logos, the left-brain logic, of their ideas.  They try to convince other 
people of the validity of that logic without firs t taking ethos and pathos into consideration. 
   I had an acquaintance who was very frustrated be cause his boss was locked in to what he felt was an 
unproductive leadership style.    "Why doesn't he do anything?" he asked me.  "I'v e talked to him about it, he's aware of it, but he 
does nothing."    "Well, why don't you make an effective presentation?"  I asked.    "I did,"  was the reply.    "How do you define 'effective'?  Who do they send back to school when the salesman doesn't sell -- 
the buyer?  Effective means it works; it means P/ PC.  Did you create the change you wanted?  Did 
you build the relationship in the process?  Wh at were the results of your presentation?" 
   "I told you, he didn't do anything.  He wouldn't listen."    "Then make an effective presentation.  You've got to empathize with his head.  You've got to get 
into his frame of mind.  You're got to make your po int simply and visually and describe the alternative 
he is in favor of better than he can himself.  Th at will take some homework.  Are you willing to do 
that?"    "Why do I have to go through all that?" he asked 
   "In other words, you want him to change his wh ole leadership style and you're not willing to change 
your method of presentation?"    "I guess so," he replied.    "Well, then," I said, "just smile about it and learn to live with it." 
   "I can't live with it,"  he said.  "It compromises my integrity."    "Okay, then get to work on an effective pres entation.  That's in your Circle of Influence." 
   In the end, he wouldn't do it .  The investment seemed too great. 
   Another acquaintance, a university professor, was willing to pay the price.  He approached me one 
day and said, "Stephen, I can't get to first base in getting the funding I need for my research because my 
research is really not in the mainstre am of this department's interests." 
   After discussing his situation at some length, I suggested that he develop an effective presentation 
using ethos, pathos, and logos.  "I know you're si ncere and the research you want to do would bring 
great benefits.  Describe the alternative they are in favor of better than they can themselves.  Show 
that you understand them in depth.  Then c arefully explain the logic behind your request." 
   "Well, I'll try," he said.    "Do you want to practice with me?"  I aske d.  He was willing, and so we dress rehearsed his 
approach.    When he went in to make his presentation, he started by saying, "Now let me see if I first 
understand what your objectives are, and what yo ur concerns are about this presentation and my 
recommendation."    He took the time to do it slowly, gradually.  In the middle of his presentation, demonstrating his 
depth of understanding and respect for their point of view, a senior professor turned to another 
professor, nodded, turned back to him and said,  "You've got your money."    When you can present your own ideas clearl y, specifically, visually, and most important, 
contextually -- in the context of a deep unders tanding of their paradigms and concerns -- you 
significantly increase the credibility of your ideas.   
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   You're not wrapped up in your "own thing," de livering grandiose rhetoric from a soapbox.  You 
really understand.  What you're presenting may ev en be different from what you had originally 
thought because in your effort to understand, you learned.    Habit 5 lifts you to greater accuracy, greater in tegrity, in your presentations.  And people know 
that.  They know you're presenting the ideas whic h you genuinely believe, taking all known facts and 
perceptions into consideration, that will benefit everyone.  One-on-One     Habit 5 is powerful because it is right in the mi ddle of your Circle of Influence.  Many factors in 
interdependent situations are in your Circle of  Concern -- problems, disagreements, circumstances, 
other people's behavior.  And if you focus your energies out there, you deplete them with little 
positive results.    But you can always seek first to understand.  Th at's something that's within your control.  And as 
you do that, as you focus on your Circle of Influenc e, you really, deeply understand other people.  You 
have accurate information to work with, you get to  the heart of matters quickly, you build Emotional 
Bank Accounts, and you give people the psycholo gical air they need so you can work together 
effectively.    It's the Inside-Out approach.  And as you do it , watch what happens to your Circle of Influence.  
Because you really listen, you become influenceable.  And being influenceable is  the key to influencing 
others.  Your circle begins to expand.  You increase  your ability to influence many of the things in 
your Circle of Concern.    And watch what happens to you.  The more de eply you understand other people, the  more you 
will appreciate them, the more reverent you will feel  about them.  To touch the soul of another human 
being is to walk on holy ground.    Habit 5 is something you can practice right no w.  The next time you communicate with anyone, 
you can put aside your own autobiography and genuinely seek to understand.  Even when people don't want to open up about thei r problems, you can be empathic.  You can sense their hearts, you can 
sense the hurt, and 
you can respond, "You seem down toda y."  The y may say nothin g.  That's all ri ght.  
You've shown understanding and respect.    Don't push; be patient; be respectful.  Peopl e  d o n ' t  h a v e  t o  o p e n  u p  v e r b a l l y  b e f o r e  y o u  c a n  
empathize.  You can empathize all the time with thei r behavior.  You can be discerning, sensitive, and 
aware and you can live outside your au tobiography when that is needed. 
   And if you're highly proactive, you can create  opportunities to do preventive work.  You don't 
h a v e  t o  w a i t  u n t i l  y o u r  s o n  o r  d a u g h t e r  h a s  a  p r o b l e m  w i t h  s c h o o l  o r  y o u  h a v e  y o u r  n e x t  b u s i n e s s  negotiation to seek first to understand.    Spend time with your children now, one-on-one.  Listen to them; understand them.  Look at your 
home, at school life, at the challenges and the prob lems they're facing, throug h their eyes.  Build the 
Emotional Bank Account.  Give them air.    Go out with your spouse on a regular basis.  Ha ve dinner or do something together you both enjoy.  
Listen to each other; seek to understa nd.  See life through each other's eyes. 
   My daily time with Sandra is something I woul dn't trade for anything.  As well as seeking to 
understand each other, we often take time to actually practice empathic listening skills to help us in 
communicating with our children.    We often share our different perceptions of  the situation, and we role-play more effective 
approaches to difficult interpersonal family problems.    I may act as if I am a son or daughter requesti ng a special privilege even though I haven't fulfilled a 
basic family responsibility, and Sandra plays herself 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   We interact back and forth and try to visualize th e situation in a very real way so that we can train 
ourselves to be consistent in modeling and teaching correct principles to our children.  Some of our 
most helpful role-plays come from redoing a past difficu lt or stressful scene in which one of us "blew it." 
   The time you invest to deeply understand the pe ople you love brings tremendous dividends in open 
communication.  Many of the problems that plague families and marriages simply don't have time to 
fester and develop.  The communic ation becomes so open that potential problems can be nipped in the 
bud.  And there are great reserves of trust in the Emotional Bank Account to handle the problems that 
do arise.    In business, you can set up one-on-one time with your employees.  Listen to them, understand 
them.  Set up human resource accounting or Stakeh older Information Systems in your business to get 
honest, accurate feedback at every level:  from  customers, suppliers, and employees.  Make the 
human element as important as the financial or the technical element.  You save tremendous amounts 
of time, energy, and money when you tap into the hu man resources of a business at every level.  When 
you listen, you learn.  And you also give the people  who work for you and with you psychological air.  
You inspire loyalty that goes well beyond the eight-to-five physical demands of the job. 
   Seek first to understand.  Before the problems come up, before you try to evaluate and prescribe, 
before you try to present your own ideas -- seek to understand.  It's a powerful habit of effective interdependence.    When we really, deeply understand each other, we open the door to creative solutions and Third 
Alternatives.  Our differences are no longer st umbling blocks to communication and progress.  
Instead, they become the st epping stones to synergy. 
 Application Suggestions     1.  Select a relationship in which you sense th e Emotional Bank Account is in the red.  Try to 
understand and write down the situation from the other person's point of view.  In your next 
interaction, listen for understanding, comparing wh at you are hearing with what you wrote down.  
How valid were your assumptions?  Did you really  understand that individual's perspective. 
   2.  Share the concept of empathy with someone cl ose to you.  Tell him or her you want to work on 
really listening to others and ask for feedback in  a week.  How did you do?  How did it make that 
person feel.    3.  The next time you have an opportunity to watch people communicate, cover your ears for a few 
minutes and just watch.  What emotions are bein g communicated that may not come across in words 
alone.    4.  Next time you catch yourself inappropriat ely using one of the auto biographical responses -- 
probing, evaluating, advising, or interpreting -- try to turn the situation into a deposit by 
acknowledgment and apology.  ("I'm sorry, I just rea lized I'm not really trying to understand.  Could 
we start again?")    5.  Base your next presentation on empathy.  Describe the other point of view as well as or better 
than its proponents; then seek to have your po int understood from their frame of reference. 
 
Habit 6:  Synergize TM 
 Principles of Creative Cooperation