T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   I take as my guide the hope of a saint 
   in crucial things, unity --    in important things, diversity --    in all things, generosity 
   -- Inaugural Address of President George Bus 
*         *  
   When Sir Winston Churchill was called to head up the war effort for Great Britain, he remarked that 
all his life had prepared him for this hour.  In a simi lar sense, the exercise of all of the other habits 
prepares us for the habit of synergy.    When properly understood, synergy is the highest activity in all life -- the true test and 
manifestation of all the other habits put together.    The highest forms of synergy focus the four unique human endowments, the motive of win-win, 
and the skills of empathic communication on the toug hest challenges we face in life.  What results is 
almost miraculous.  We create new alternat ives -- something that wasn't there before. 
   Synergy is the essence of Principle-Centered Lead ership.  It is the essence of principle-centered 
parenting.  It catalyzes, unifies, and unleashes th e greatest powers within people.  All the habits we 
have covered prepare us to create the miracle of synergy.    What is synergy? Simply defined, it means that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.  It 
means that the relationship which the parts have to each other is a part in and of itself.  It is not only a 
part, but the most catalytic, the most empowering,  the most unifying, and the most exciting part. 
   The creative process is also the most terrifying part because you don't know exactly what's going to 
happen or where it is going to lead.  You don't know  what new dangers and challenges you'll find.  It 
takes an enormous amount of internal security to be gin with the spirit of adventure, the spirit of 
discovery, the spirit of creativity.  Without doubt, you have to leave the comfort zone of base camp 
and confront an entirely new and unknown wilderne ss.  You become a trailblazer, a pathfinder.  You 
open new possibilities, new territories, new continents, so that others can follow. 
   Synergy is everywhere in nature.  If you plan t two plants close together, the roots commingle and 
improve the quality of the soil so that both plants will grow better than if they were separated.  If you 
put two pieces of wood together, they will hold mu ch more than the total of  the weight held by each 
separately.  The whole is greater than the sum of its parts.  One plus one equals three or more. 
   The challenge is to apply the principles of crea tive cooperation, which we learn from nature, in our 
social interactions.  Family life provides many o pportunities to observe synergy and to practice it. 
   The very way that man and a woman bring a child  into the world is synergistic.  The essence of 
synergy is to value differences -- to respect them, to  build on strengths, to compensate for weaknesses. 
   We obviously value the physical differences between men and women, husbands and wives.  But 
what about the social, mental, and emotional differences? Could these di fferences not also be sources of 
creating new exciting forms of life -- creating an envi ronment that is truly fulf illing for each person, that 
nurtures the self-esteem and self-worth to each, th at creates opportunities for each to mature into 
independence and then gradually into interdepende nce? Could synergy not create a new script for the 
next generation -- one that is more geared to serv ice and contribution, and is less protective, less 
adversarial, less selfish; one that is more open, mo re giving, and is less defensive, protective, and 
political; one that is more loving, more c aring, and is less possessive and judgmental? 
 Synergistic Communication     When you communicate synergistically, yo u are simply opening yo ur mind and heart and 
expressions to new possibilities, new alternatives, new options.  It may seem as if you are casting aside 
Habit 2 (to Begin with the End in Mind); but, in fact, you're doing the opposite -- you're fulfilling it.  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
You're not sure when you engage in synergistic co mmunication how things will work out or what the 
end will look like, but you do have an inward sense of excitement and security and adventure, believing 
that it will be significantly bette r than it was before.  And that is  the end that you have in mind. 
   You begin with the belief that parties involved will  gain more insight, and th at the excitement of that 
mutual learning and insigh t will create a momentum toward mo re and more insights, learning, and 
growth.    Many people have not really experienced even a moderate degree of synergy in  their family life or in 
other interactions.  They've been trained and scripte d into defensive and protective communications or 
into believing that life or other peop le can't be trusted.  As a result, they are never really open to Habit 
6 and to these principles.    This represents one of the great tragedies and wastes in life, because so  much potential remains 
untapped -- completely undeveloped and unused.  In effective people live day after day with unused 
potential.  They experience synergy only in  small, peripheral ways in their lives. 
   They may have memories of some unusual creati ve experiences, perhaps in athletics, where they 
were involved in a real team spirit for a period of time.  Or perhaps they were in an emergency situation where people cooperated to an unusually  high degree and submerged ego and pride in an 
effort to save someone's life or to produce a solution to a crisis.    To many, such events may seem  unusual, almost out of character with life, even miraculous.  But 
this is not so.  These things can be produced regul arly, consistently, almost daily in people's lives.  
But it requires enormous personal securi ty and openness and a spirit of adventure. 
   Almost all creative endeavors are somewhat unpredictable.  They often seem ambiguous, hit-or-miss, trial and error.  And unless people ha ve a high tolerance for ambiguity and get their 
security from integrity to principles and inner valu es they find it unnerving and unpleasant to be 
involved in highly creative enterprises.  Their need  for structure, certainty, and predictability is too 
high.  Synergy in the Classroom     As a teacher, I have come to believe that many tr uly great classes teeter on the very edge of chaos.  
Synergy tests whether teachers and students are really  open to the principle of  the whole being greater 
than the sum of its parts.    There are times when neither the teacher nor the student know for sure what's going to happen.  In 
the beginning, there's a safe environment that enables pe ople to be really open and to learn and to listen 
to each other's ideas.  Then come s brainstorming where the spirit of evaluation is subordinated to the 
spirit of creativity, imagining, and intellectual ne tworking.  Then an absolu tely unusual phenomenon 
begins to take place.  The entire class is transfor med with the excitement of a new thrust, a new idea, a 
new direction that's hard to define, yet it's  almost palpable to the people involved. 
   Synergy is almost as if a group collectively agr ees to subordinate old scripts and to write a new one. 
   I'll never forget a university class I taught in le adership philosophy and style.  We were about three 
weeks into a semester when, in the middle of a presen tation, one person started  to relate some very 
powerful personal experiences which were both emot ional and insightful.  A spirit of humility and 
reverence fell upon the class -- reverence toward th is individual and appreciation for his courage. 
   This spirit became fertile soil for a synergistic an d creative endeavor.  Others began to pick up on it, 
sharing some of their experiences an d insights and even some of their self-doubts.  The spirit of trust 
and safety prompted many to become extremely open.  Rather than present what they prepared, they 
fed on each other's insights and ideas and started to  create a whole new scenari o as to what that class 
could mean.  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   I was deeply involved in the process.  In fact, I was almost mesmerized by it because it seemed so 
magical and creative.  And I found myself gradually loosening up my commitment to the structure of 
the class and sensing entirely new possibilities.  It wa sn't just a flight of fancy; there was a sense of 
maturity and stability and substance which tran scended by far the old structure and plan. 
   We abandoned the old syllabus, the purchased te xtbooks, and all the presentation plans, and we set 
up new purposes and projects and assignments.  We became so excited ab out what was happening 
that in about three more weeks, we all sensed an overwhelming desire to share what was happening 
with others    We decided to write a book containing our le arnings and insights on the subject of our study -- 
principles of leadership.  Assignments were chan ged, new projects undertaken, new teams formed.  
People worked much harder than they ever would ha ve in the original class structure, and for an 
entirely different set of reasons    Out of this experience emerged an extremely un ique, cohesive, and synergistic culture that did not 
end with the semester.  For years, alumni meetings  were held among members of that class.  Even 
today, many years later, when we see each other, we talk about it and often attempt to describe what 
happened and why.    One of the interesting things to me was how little time had transp ired before there was sufficient 
trust to create such synergy.  I think it was larg ely because the people were relatively mature.  They 
were in the final semester of their senior year, and I think they wanted more than just another good 
classroom experience.  They were hungry for some thing new and exciting, something that they could 
create that was truly meaningful.  It was "an idea  whose time had come" for them. In addition, the 
chemistry was right.  I felt that experiencing sy nergy was more powerful than  talking about it, that 
producing something new was more meaning ful than simply reading something old. 
   I've also experienced, as I believe most people  have, times that were almost  synergistic, times that 
hung on the edge of chaos and for some reason desce nded into it.  Sadly, people who are burned by 
such experiences often begin their next new experi e n c e  w i t h  t h a t  f a i l u r e  i n  m i n d .   T h e y  d e f e n d  
themselves against it and cut themselves off from synergy.    It's like administrators who set up new rules an d regulations based on the abuses of a few people 
inside an organization, thus limiting the freedom and creative possibilities for many -- or business 
partners who imagine the worst scenarios possible and write them up in legal language, killing the 
whole spirit of creativity, enterprise, and synergistic possibility.    As I think back on many consulting and ex ecutive education experiences, I can say that the 
highlights were almost always synergistic.  Th ere was usually an early moment that required 
considerable courage, perhaps in becoming extremely authentic, in confronting some inside truth about 
the individual or the organization or  the family which really needed to be said, but took a combination 
of considerable courage and genuine love to say it .  Then others became mo re authentic, open, and 
honest, and the synergistic communication process bega n.  It usually became more and more creative, 
and ended up in insights and plans th at no one had anticipated initially. 
   As Carl Rogers taught, "That which is most personal is most general."  The more authentic you 
become, the more genuine in your expression, part icularly regarding personal experiences and even 
self-doubts, the more people can relate to your expr ession and the safer it makes them feel to express 
themselves.  That expression in turn feeds back on the other person's spir it, and genuine creative 
empathy takes place, producing new insights and le arnings and a sense of excitement and adventure 
that keeps the process going.    People then begin to interact wi th each other almost in half sent ences, sometimes incoherently, but 
they get each other's meanings ve ry rapidly.  Then whole new worlds  of insights, new perspectives, 
new paradigms that insure options, new alternativ es are opened up and th ought about.  Though 
occasionally these new ideas are left  up  i n  t h e a i r ,  they  usua l l y  co me t o  so me k i n d  o f cl o sur e t h a t  i s 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
practical and useful. 
 Synergy in Business     I enjoyed one particularly meaningful synergisti c experience as I worked with my associates to 
create the corporate mission statement for our bu siness.  Almost all members of the company went 
high up into the mountains where, surrounded by th e magnificence of nature, we began with a first 
draft of what some of us considered to be an excellent mission statement. 
   At first the communication was respectful, carefu l and predictable.  But as  we began to talk about 
the various alternatives, possibilities, and opportunit ies ahead, people became very open and authentic 
and simply started to think out lo ud.  The mission statement agenda  gave way to a collective free 
association, a spontaneous piggyb acking of ideas.  People were genuinely empathic as well as 
courageous, and we moved from mutual respec t and understanding to creative synergistic 
communication.    Everyone could sense it.  It was exciting.  As it matured, we returned to the task of putting the 
evolved collective vision into words, each of wh ich contains specific an d committed-to meaning for 
each participant.    The resulting corporate mission statement reads:    Our Mission is to empower people and organizat ions to significantly increase their performance 
capability in order to achieve worthwhile purposes through understanding and living 
Principle-Centered Leadership.    The synergistic process that led to the creation of our mission statement eng raved it in all the hearts 
and minds of everyone there, and it has served us wel l as a frame of reference of what we are about, as 
well as what we are not about.    Another high-level synergy experience took plac e when I accepted an invi tation to serve as the 
resource and discussion catalyst at the annual planni ng meeting of a large insurance company.  Several 
months ahead, I met with the committee responsibl e to prepare for and stage the two-day meeting 
which was to involve all the top executives.  They informed me that the t raditional pattern was to 
identify four or five major issues through questi onnaires and interviews, and to have alternative 
proposals presented by the executives.  Past meet ings had been generally respectful exchanges, 
occasionally deteriorating into defensive win-lo se ego battles.  They were usually predictable, 
uncreative, and boring.    As I talked with the committee members about the power of synergy, they could sense its potential.  
With considerable trepidation, they agreed to chan ge the pattern.  They requested various executives 
to prepare anonymous "white papers" on each of the high priority issues, and then asked all the 
executives to immerse themselves in these papers ah ead of time in order to understand the issues and 
the differing points of view.  They were to come to the meeting prepared to listen rather than to 
present, prepared to create and synergiz e rather than to defend and protect. 
   We spent the first half-day in the meeting teaching  the principles and practici ng the skills of Habits 4, 
5, and 6.  The rest of the time was spent in creative synergy.    The release of creative energy was incredible.  Excitement replaced boredom.  People became very 
open to each other's influence and generated new insi ghts and options.  By the end of the meeting an 
entirely new understanding of the nature of the ce ntral company challenge ev olved.  The white paper 
proposals became obsolete.  Differences were valu ed and transcended.  A new common vision began 
to form.    Once people have experienced real synergy, th ey are never quite the same again.  They know the 
possibility of having other such mind-expanding adventures in the future.    Often attempts are made to recreate a particular synergistic experience, but this seldom can be done.  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
However, the essential purpose behind creative wo rk can be recaptured.  Like the Far Eastern 
philosophy, "We seek not to imitate the masters, rather we seek what they sought," we seek not to 
imitate past creative synergistic experiences, rat her we seek new ones around new and different and 
sometimes higher purposes.  Snergy and Communication     Synergy is exciting.  Creativity is exciting.  It's phenomenal what openness and communication 
can produce.  The possibilities of truly significant gain , of significant improvemen t are so real that it's 
worth the risk such openness entails.    After World War II, the United States commiss ioned David Lilienthal to head the new Atomic 
Energy Commission.  Lilienthal brought together a gr oup of people who were highly influential -- 
celebrities in their own right -- disciples, as it were, of their own frames of reference. 
   This very diverse group of individuals had an extremely heavy agenda, and they were impatient to 
get at it.  In addition, the press was pushing them. 
   But Lilienthal took several weeks to create a hi gh Emotional Bank Account.  He had these people 
get to know each other -- their interests, their hopes,  their goals, their concerns, their backgrounds, their 
frames of reference, their paradigms.  He facilitated  the kind of human interaction that creates a great 
bonding between people, and he was heavily criticized for taking the time to do it because it wasn't 
"efficient."    But the net result was that this  group became closely knit together, very open with each other, very 
creative, and synergistic.  The respect among the me mbers of the commission was so high that if there 
was disagreement, instead of opposition and defense,  there was a genuine effo rt to understand.  The 
attitude was "If a person of your intelligence and competence and commitment disagrees with me, then 
there must be something to your disagreement that I don't understand, and I need to understand it.  
You have a perspective, a frame of reference I need to look at." Nonprotectiv e interaction developed, 
and an unusual culture was born.    The following diagram illustrates how closely trus t is related to different levels of communication. 
   The lowest level of communication coming out of low-trust situations would be characterized by 
defensiveness, protectiveness, and often legalistic la nguage, which covers all the bases and spells out 
qualifiers and the escape clauses in the event thin gs go sour.  Such communication produces only 
win-lose or lose-lose.  It isn't effective -- there' s no P/PC Balance -- and it creates further reasons to 
defend and protect.    The middle position is respectful communication.   This is the level where fairly mature people 
interact.  They have respect for each other, but they want to avoid the possibilit y of ugly confrontations, 
so they communicate politely but not empathically.  They might understand each other intellectually, 
but they really don't deeply look at the paradigms  and assumptions underlying  their own opinions and 
become open to new possibilities.    Respectful communication works in independent situations and even in in terdependent situations, 
but the creative possibilities are not opened up.  In interdependent situations compromise is the 
position usually taken.  Compromise means that 1 + 1 + 1 =  1/2.  Both give and take.  The communication isn't defensive or pr otective or angry or manipulative ; it is honest and genuine and 
respectful.  But it isn't creative or synergis tic.  It produces a low form of win-win. 
   Synergy means that 1 + 1 may equal 8, 16, or even 1,600.  The synergistic position of high trust produces solutions better than any originally propos ed, and all parties know it.  Furthermore, they 
genuinely enjoy the creative enterprise.  A miniculture is  formed to satisfy in and of itself.  Even if it 
is short-lived, the P/PC Balance is there.  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   There are some circumstances in which synergy ma y not be achievable and no deal isn't viable.  But 
even in these circumstances, the spirit of sincer e trying will usually result in a more effective 
compromise.  Fishing for the A Third Alternative     To get a better idea of how our level of communication affects our interdependent effectiveness, 
envision the following scenario.    It's vacation time, and a husband wants to take his family out to the lake country to enjoy camping 
and fishing.  This is important to him; he's been planning it all year.  He's made reservations at a 
cottage on the lake and arranged to rent a boat, and his sons are really excited about going. 
   His wife, however, wants to use the vacation time  to visit her ailing mother some 250 miles away.  
She doesn't have the opportunity to see her very often, and this is important to her 
   Their differences could be the ca use of a major negative experience. 
   "The plans are set.  The boys are excited.  We should go on the fishing trip," he says. 
   "But we don't know how much longer my mother  will be around, and I want to be by her," she 
replies.  "This is our only opportuni ty to have enough time to do that." 
   "All year long we've looked forward to this one-week vacation.  The boys would be miserable 
sitting around grandmother's house for a week.  Th ey'd drive everybody crazy.  Besides, your 
mother's not that sick.  And she has your sister  less than a mile away to take care of her." 
   "She's my mother, too.  I want to be with her."    "You could phone her every night.  And we're planning to spend time with her at the Christmas 
family reunion.  Remember?"    "That's not for five more months.  We don't even  know if she'll still be here by then.  Besides, she 
needs me, and she wants me."    "She's being well taken care of.  Besides, the boys and I need you, too."    "My mother is more important than fishing."    "Your husband and sons are mo re important than your mother." 
   As they disagree, back and forth, they finally may come up with some kind of compromise.  They 
may decide to split up -- he takes the boys fishing at the lake while she visits her mother.  And they 
both feel guilty and unhappy.  The boys sense it, and it affects their enjoyment of the vacation. 
   The husband may give in to his wife, but he does  it grudgingly.  And con sciously or unconsciously, 
he produces evidence to fulfill his prophecy of how miserable the week will be for everyone. 
   The wife may give in to her husband, bu t she's withdrawn and overreactive to any new 
developments in her mother's health  situation.  If her mother were to become seriously ill and die, the 
husband could never forgive himself, and she couldn't forgive him either. 
   Whatever compromise they finally agree on, it could be rehearsed over the years as evidence of 
insensitivity, neglect, or a bad priority decision on ei ther part.  It could be a source of contention for 
years and could even polarize the family.  Many marriages that once were beautiful and soft and 
spontaneous and loving have deteriorated to the level of a hostility through a seri es of incidents just like 
this.    The husband and wife see the situation differently.  And that di fference can polarize them, separate 
them, create wedges in the relationship.  Or it can bring them closer together on a higher level.  If they have cultivated the habits of  effective interdependence, they a pproach their differences from an 
entirely different paradigm.  Their co mmunication is on a higher level. 
   Because they have a high Emotional Bank Acco unt, they have trust and open communication in 
their marriage.  Because they Think Win-Win, they believe in a Third Alternative, a solution that is 
mutually beneficial and is better than what either of them originally proposed.  Because they listen 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
empathically and seek first to understand, they  create within themselves and between them a 
comprehensive picture of the values and the concerns that need to be taken in to account in making a 
decision.    And the combination of those ingredients -- th e high Emotional Bank Account, thinking win-win, 
and seeking first to understand -- creates the ideal environment for synergy.    Buddhism calls this "the middle way." Middle in  this sense does not me an compromise; it means 
higher, like the apex of the triangle.    In searching for the "middle" or higher way, this husband and wife rea lize that their love, their 
relationship, is part of their synergy    As they communicate, the husband really, deeply  feels his wife's desire, her need to be with her 
mother.  He understands how she wants to relieve her sister, who has had the primary responsibility 
for their mother's care.  He understands that they really don't know how long she will be with them, 
and that she certainly is mo re important than fishing. 
   And the wife deeply understands her husband's de sire to have the family together and to provide a 
great experience for the boys.  She realizes the investment that has been made in lessons and 
equipment to prepare for this fishing vacation, and sh e feels the importance of creating good memories 
with them.    So they pool those desires.  And they're not on opposite sides of the problem.  They're together on 
one side, looking at the problem, understanding the needs, and working to cr eate a Third Alternative 
that will meet them.    "Maybe we could arrange another time within th e month for you to visit with your mother," he 
suggests.  "I could take over the home responsib ilities for the weekend and arrange for some help at 
the first of the week so that you could go.  I kn ow it's important to you to have that time. 
   "Or maybe we could locate a place to camp and fi sh that would be close to your mother.  The area 
wouldn't be as nice, but we could still be outdoor s and meet other needs as  well.  And the boys 
wouldn't be climbing the walls.  We could even plan  some recreational activities with the cousins, 
aunts, and uncles, which would be an added benefit."    They synergize.  They communicate back and fo rth until they come up with a solution they both 
feel good about.  It's better than the solutions eith er of them originally proposed.  It's better than 
compromise.  It's a synergistic solution that builds P and PC. 
   Instead of a transaction, it's a transformation.  They get what they both really want and build their 
relationship in the process.  Negative Synergy     Seeking the Third Alternative is  a major Paradigm Shift from the di chotomous, either/or mentality.  
But look at the difference in results.    How much negative energy is typically expend ed when people try to solve problems or make 
decisions in an interdependent reality? How much time is spent in confessing other people's sins, 
politicking, rivalry, interpersonal conflict, protec ting one's backside, masterminding, and second 
guessing? It's like trying to drive down the road wi th one foot on the gas and the other foot on the 
brake.    And instead of getting a foot off the brake, most people give it more gas.  They try to apply more 
pressure, more eloquence, more logical in formation to strength en their position. 
   The problem is that highly dependent people are trying to succeed in an interdependent reality.  
They're either dependent on borrowing strength fr om position power and th ey go for win-lose or 
they're dependent on being popular with others an d they go for lose-win.  They may talk win-win 
technique, but they don't really wa nt to listen; they want to manipu late.  And synergy can't thrive in 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
that environment. 
   Insecure people think that all reality should be amenable to their paradigms.  They have a high 
need to clone others, to mold them  over into their own thinking.  They don't realize that the very 
strength of the relationship is in having another po int of view.  Sameness is not oneness; uniformity is 
not unity.  Unity, or oneness, is complement ariness, not sameness.  Sameness is uncreative...and 
boring.  The essence of synergy is to value the differences.    I've come to believe that the key to interperso nal synergy is intrapersonal synergy, that is synergy 
within ourselves.  The heart of interpersonal syner gy is embodied in the prin ciples in the first three 
habits, which give the internal security sufficient to handle the risks of being open and vulnerable.  By 
internalizing those principles, we develop the Abunda nce Mentality of win-win and the authenticity of 
Habit 5.    One of the very practical results of being prin ciple-centered is that it makes us whole -- truly 
integrated.  People who are scripted deeply in logi cal, verbal, left-brain thinking will discover how 
totally inadequate that thinking is in solving proble ms which require a great deal of creativity.  They 
become aware and begin to open up a new script inside  their right brain.  It's not that the right brain 
wasn't there; it just lay dormant.  The muscles ha d not been developed, or perhaps they had atrophied 
after early childhood because of the heavy left-brain emphasis of formal education or social scripting. 
   When a person has access to bo th the intuitive, creative, and visu al right brain, and the analytical, 
logical, verbal left brain, then the whole brain is working.  In other words, there is psychic synergy 
taking place in our own head.  And th is tool is best suited to the rea lity of what life is, because life is 
not just logical -- it is also emotional.    One day I was presenting a seminar which I titled , "Manage from the Left, Le ad from the Right" to a 
company in Orlando, Florida.  During the break, the president of the company came up to me and said, 
"Stephen, this is intriguing.  But I have been th inking about this material  more in terms of its 
application to my marriage than to my business.  My wife and I have a real communication problem.  
I wonder if you would have lunch with the two of us and just kind of watch how we talk to each other? 
   "Let's do it," I replied.    As we sat down together, we exchanged a few plea santries.  Then this man turned to his wife and 
said, "Now, honey, I've invited Stephen to have lu nch with us to see if he  could help us in our 
communication with each other.  I know you feel I should be a more sensitive, considerate husband.  
Could you give me something specific  you think I ought to do?" His do minant left brain wanted facts, 
figures, specifics, parts.    " W e l l ,  a s  I ' v e  t o l d  y o u  b e f o re, it's nothing specific.  It's mo re of a general sense I have about 
priorities." Her dominant right brain was dealing wi th sensing and with the gestalt, the whole, the 
relationship between the parts.    "What do you mean, 'a general feeling about prio r i t i e s ' ?  W h a t  i s  i t  y o u  w a n t  m e  t o  d o ?  G i v e  m e  
something specific I can get a handle on."    "Well, it's just a feeling." Her right brain was dea ling in images, intuitive feelings.  "I just don't think 
our marriage is as important to you as you tell me it is."    "Well, what can I do to make it more important?  Give me something concrete and specific to go on." 
   "It's hard to put into words."    At that point, he just rolled his eyes and looked at me as if to say, "Stephen, could you endure this 
kind of dumbness in your marriage?"    "It's just a feeling," she said, "a very strong feeling."    "Honey," he said to her, "that's your problem.  And that's the problem with  your mother.  In fact, 
it's the problem with every woman I know."    Then he began to interrogate her as th ough it were some kind of legal deposition. 
   "Do you live where you want to live?" 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   "That's not it," she sighed.  "That's not it at all." 
   "I know," he replied with a forced patience.  "But since you won't tell me exactly what it is, I figure the best way to find out what it is  is to find out what it is not.  Do you live where you want to live?" 
   "I guess."    "Honey, Stephen's here for just a few minutes to try to help us.  Just give me a quick 'yes' or 'no' 
answer.  Do you live where you want to live?"    " Y e s . "     "Okay.  That's settled.  Do you have the things you want to have?"    " Y e s . "     "All right.  Do you do the things you want to do?"    This went on for a little while, an d I could see I wasn't helping at a ll.  So I intervened and said, "Is 
this kind of how it goes in your relationship?"    "Every day, Stephen," he replied.    "It's the story of our marriage," she sighed.    I looked at the two of them and the though t crossed my mind that they were two half-brained 
people living together.  "Do yo u have any children?" I asked. 
   "Yes, two."    "Really?" I asked incredulously.  "How did you do it?"    "What do you mean how did we do it?"    "You were synergistic!" I said.  "One plus one usually equals two.  But you made one plus one 
equal four.  Now that's synergy.  The whole is grea ter than the sum of the parts.  So how did you do 
it?"    "You know how we did it," he replied.    "You must have valued the differences!" I exclaimed.  Valuing the Differences     Valuing the differences is the essence of syne rgy -- the mental, the emotional, the psychological 
differences between people.  And the key to valuing th ose differences is to realize that all people see 
the world, not as it is, but as they are.    If I think I see the world as it is, why would I want to value the differences? Why would I even want 
to bother with someone who's "off t rack"? My paradigm is that I am objective; I see the world as it is.  
Everyone else is buried by the minutia, but I see the larger picture.  That's why they call me a supervisor -- I have super vision.    If that's my paradigm, then I will never be  effectively interdependent, or even effectively 
independent, for that matter.  I will be limited  by the paradigms of my own conditioning. 
   The person who is truly effective has the hum ility and reverence to recognize his own perceptual 
limitations and to appreciate the rich resources av ailable through interaction with the hearts and minds 
of other human beings.  That person values the differences because those differences add to his 
knowledge, to his understanding of reality.  When  we're left to our own experiences, we constantly 
suffer from a shortage of data.    Is it lo
gical that two people can disa gree and that both can be ri ght? It's not lo gical: it's ps ycholo gical.  
And it's very real.  You see the young lady; I see the old woman.  We're both looking at the same 
picture, and both of us are right.  We see th e same black lines, the sa me white spaces.  But we 
interpret them differently because we've been  conditioned to interpret them differently. 
   And unless we value the differences in our pe rceptions, unless we value each other and give 
credence to the possibility that we're both right, th at life is not always a di chotomous either/or, that 
there are almost always Third Alternatives, we will never be able to transcend the limits of that 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
conditioning. 
   All I may see is the old woman.  But I realize that you see something else.  And I value you.  I 
value your perception.  I want to understand.    So when I become aware of the difference in ou r perceptions, I say, "Good! You see it differently! 
Help me see what you see."    If two people have the same opinion, one is unne cessary.  It's not going to do me any good at all to 
communicate with someone else who sees only th e old woman also.  I do n't want to talk, to 
communicate, with someone who agrees with me; I wa nt to communicate with you because you see it 
differently.  I value that difference.    By doing that, I not only incr ease my own awareness; I also affirm  you.  I give you psychological 
air.  I take my foot off the brake and release the ne gative energy you may have invested in defending a 
particular position.  I create an environment for synergy.    The importance of valuing the difference is capt ured in an often-quoted fable called "The Animal 
School," written by educator Dr. R. H. Reeves.    Once upon a time, the animals decided they must  do something heroic to meet the problems of a 
"New World," so they organized a school.  They adop ted an activity curriculum consisting of running, 
climbing, swimming, and flying.  To make it easier  to administer, all animals took all the subjects. 
   The duck was excellent in swimming, better in fa ct than his instructor, and made excellent grades in 
flying, but he was very poor in running.  Since he was low in running he had to stay after school and 
also drop swimming to practice running.  This was kept up until his web feet were badly worn and he 
was only average in swimming.  But average was ac ceptable in school, so nobody worried about that 
except the duck.    The rabbit started at the top of the class in running, but had a nervous breakdown because of so 
much makeup in swimming.    The squirrel was excellent in climbing until he developed frustrations in the flying class where his 
teacher made him start from the ground up instea d of from the tree-top down.  He also developed 
charley horses from over-exertion and he got a C in climbing and a D in running. 
   The eagle was a problem child and had to be discip lined severely.  In climbing class he beat all the 
others to the top of the tree, but insisted on using his own way of getting there.    At the end of the year, an abnormal eel that co uld swim exceedingly well and also could run, climb 
and fly a little had the highest average and was valedictorian.    The prairie dogs stayed out of school and fought  the tax levy because the administration would not 
add digging and burrowing to the curriculum.  They apprenticed their children to the badger and later 
joined the groundhogs and gophers to start a successful private school. 
 Force Field Analysis     In an interdependent situation, synergy is part icularly powerful in dealing with negative forces that 
work against growth and change.    Sociologist Kurt Lewin developed a "Force Fiel d Analysis" model in which he described any current 
level of performance or being as a state of equ ilibrium between the drivin g forces that encourage 
upward movement and the restraining forces that discourage it.    Driving forces generally are positive, reasonable, logical, conscious, and economic.  In juxtaposition, 
restraining forces are often negative , emotional, illogical, unconscious, and social/psychological.  Both 
sets of forces are very real and must be taken into account in dealing with change. 
   In a family, for example, you have a certain "cli mate" in the home -- a cert ain level of positive or 
negative interaction, of feeling safe or unsafe in expr essing feelings or talking about concerns, of respect 
or disrespect in communication among family members. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   You may really want to change that level.  You may want to create a climate that is more positive, 
more respectful, more open and trusting.  Your lo gical reasons for doing that are the driving forces 
that act to raise the level..    But increasing those driving forces is not enough .  Your efforts are opposed by restraining forces -- 
by the competitive spirit between children in the fam ily, by the different scripting of home life you and 
your spouse have brought to the relationship, by habi ts that have developed in the family, by work or 
other demands on your time and energies.    Increasing the driving forces may bring results -- for a while.  But as long as the restraining forces 
are there, it becomes increasingly harder.  It's lik e pushing against a spring: the harder you push, the 
harder it is to push until the force of th e spring suddenly thrusts the level back down. 
   The resulting up and down, yo-y o effect causes you to feel, after several attempts, that people are 
"just the way they are" and that "it's too difficult to change."    But when you introduce synergy, you use th e motive of Habit 4, the skill of Habit 5, and the 
interaction of Habit 6 to work directly on the rest raining forces.  You unfreeze them, loosen them up, 
and create new insights that actually transform thos e restraining forces into driving ones.  You involve 
people in the problem, immerse them in it, so that they soak it in an d feel it is their problem and they 
tend to become an important part of the solution.    As a result, new goals, shared goals, are create d, and the whole enterprise moves upward, often in 
ways that no one could have anticipated.  And the excitement contained within that movement creates 
a new culture.  The people involved in it are en meshed in each other's humanity and empowered by 
new, fresh thinking, by new creative  alternatives and opportunities. 
   I've been involved several times in negotiatio ns between people who were angry at each other and 
hired lawyers to defend their positions.  And all that did was to exacerbate the problem because the 
interpersonal communication deteriorated as it went through the legal process.  But the trust level was 
so low that the parties felt they had no other alternative than to take the issues to court. 
   "Would you be interested in going for a win-win so lution that both parties f eel really good about?" I 
would ask.    The response was usually affirmative, but mo st people didn't really think it was possible. 
   "If I can get the other party to agree, would you be willing to start the process of really communicating with each other?"    Again, the answer was usually "yes."    The results in almost every case have been astounding.  Problems that had been legally and 
psychologically wrangled about for months have been settled in a matter of a few hours or days.  Most 
of the solutions weren't the courthouse compromise solutions either; they were synergistic, better than 
the solutions proposed independently by either party.   And, in most cases, the relationships continued 
even though it had appeared in the beginning that the trust level was so low and the rupture in the 
relationship so large as to be almost irreparable.    At one of our development programs, an execut ive reported a situation where a manufacturer was 
being sued by a longtime industrial customer for lack of performance.  Both part ies felt totally justified 
in the rightness of their position and perceived each  other as unethical and completely untrustworthy. 
   As they began to practice Habit 5, two things became clear.  First, early communication problems 
resulted in a misunderstanding which was later ex acerbated by accusations and counteraccusations.  
Second, both were initially acting in good faith and didn't like the cost and ha ssle of a legal fight, but 
saw no other way out.    Once these two things became clear, the spirit  of Habits 4, 5, and 6 took over, the problem was 
rapidly resolved, and the relationship continues to prosper.    In another circumstance, I received an early morning phone call from a land developer desperately 
searching for help.  The bank wanted to foreclos e because he was not comp lying with the principal 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
and interest payment schedule, and he was suing th e bank to avoid the fore closure.  He needed 
additional funding to finish and market the land so  that he could repay the bank, but the bank refused 
to provide additional funds unt il scheduled payments were met.  It was a chicken-and-egg problem 
with undercapitalization.    In the meantime, the project was languishing.  The streets were beginning to look like weed fields, 
and the owners of the few homes that  had been built were up in arms as  they saw their property values 
drop.  The city was also upset over the "prime land" project falling behind schedule and becoming an eyesore.  Tens of thousands of dollars in legal costs had already been sp ent by the bank and the 
developer and the case wasn't scheduled to come to court for several months. 
   In desperation, this developer reluctantly agreed to try the principles of Habits 4, 5, and 6.  He arranged a meeting with even more  reluctant bank officials. 
   The meeting started at 8 A.M.  in one of the bank conference rooms.  The tension and mistrust 
were palpable.  The attorney for th e bank had committed the bank offici als to say nothing.  They were 
only to listen and he alone would speak.  He wanted nothing to happen that would compromise the bank's position in court.    For the first hour and a half, I taught Habits 4, 5, and 6.  At 9:30 I went to the blackboard and wrote 
down the bank's concerns based on our prior understa nding.  Initially the bank officials said nothing, 
but the more we communicated win-win intentions an d sought first to understand, the more they 
opened up to explain and clarify.    As they began to feel understood, the whol e atmosphere changed and a sense of momentum, of 
excitement over the prospect of peacefully settl ing the problem was clearl y evident.  Over the 
attorney's objections the bank officials opened up  even more, even about personal concerns.  "When 
we walk out of here the first thing the bank presid ent will say is, 'Did we get our money?' What are we 
going to say?"    By 11:00, the bank officers were still convinced of their rightness, but they felt understood and were 
no longer defensive and officious.  At that point, they wer e sufficiently open to listen to the developer's 
concerns, which we wrote down on th e other side of the blackboard.  This resulted in deeper mutual 
understanding and a collective awareness of ho w poor early communication had resulted in 
misunderstanding and unrealistic expectations, and how continuous communicat ion in a win-win spirit 
could have prevented the subsequent major problems from developing.    The shared sense of both chronic and acute pain  combined with a sense of genuine progress kept 
everyone communicating.  By noon, when the meetin g was scheduled to end, the people were positive, 
creative, and synergistic and wanted to keep talking.    The very first recommendation made by the de veloper was seen as a beginning win-win approach 
by all.  It was synergized on and improved, and at  12:45 P.M.  the developer and the two bank officers 
left with a plan to present together to the Home Owners' Association and the city.  Despite subsequent 
complicating developments, the legal fight was ab orted and the building project continued to a 
successful conclusion.    I am not suggesting that people should not use le gal processes.  Some situations absolutely require 
it.  But I see it as a court of last, not first, resort.  If it is used too early, even in a preventive sense, 
sometimes fear and the legal paradigm create subseq uent thought and action processes that are not 
synergistic.  All Nature is Synergistic     Ecology is a word which basically describes the synergism in nature -- everything is related to everything else.  It's in the relati onship that creative powers are maxi mized, just as the real power in 
these Seven Habits is in their relationship to each other, not just in the individual habits themselves. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   The relationship of the parts is  also the power in creating a synergistic culture inside a family or an 
organization.  The more genuine the involvement, th e more sincere and sustained the participation in 
analyzing and solving problems, the greater the re lease of everyone's creativity, and of their 
commitment to what they create.  This, I'm convince d, is the essence of the power in the Japanese 
approach to business, which has changed the world marketplace.    Synergy works; it's a correct principle.  It is the crowning achievement of all the previous habits.  
It is effectiveness in an interdependent reality -- it is teamwork, team build ing, the development of 
unity and creativity with other human beings.    Although you cannot control the paradigms of others in an interdepen dent interaction or the 
synergistic process itself, a great deal of sy nergy is within your Circle of Influence. 
   Your own internal synergy is completely within the circle.  You can respect both sides of your own 
nature -- the analytical side and the creative side.  You can value the difference between them and use 
that difference to catalyze creativity.    You can be synergistic within yourself even in  the midst of a very adversarial environment.  You 
don't have to take insults personally.  You can side step negative energy; you can look for the good in 
others and utilize that good, as diffe rent as it may be, to improve you point of view and to enlarge your 
perspective.    You can exercise the courage in interdependent si tuations to be open, to express your ideas, your 
feelings, and your experiences in a way that will encourage other people to be open also. 
   You can value the difference in other people.  When someone disagrees with you, you can say, 
"Good! You see it differently." You don't have to ag ree with them; you can simply affirm them.  And 
you can seek to understand.    When you see only two alternatives -- yours an d the "wrong" one -- you can look for a synergistic 
Third Alternative.  There's almost always a Thir d Alternative, and if you work with a win-win 
philosophy and really seek to un derstand, you usually can find a solution that will be better for 
everyone concerned.  Application Suggestions     1.  Think about a person who typically sees th ings differently than you do.  Consider ways in 
which those differences might be used as stepping-s tones to Third Alternative solutions.  Perhaps you 
could seek out his or her views on a current projec t or problem, valuing the different views you are 
likely to hear.    2.  Make a list of people who irritate you.  Do  they represent different views that could lead to 
synergy if you had greater intrinsic security and valued the differences.    3.  Identify a situation in which you desire greater teamwork and synergy.  What conditions 
would need to exist to support synergy? What can you do to create those conditions.    4.  The next time you have a disagreement or confrontation with someone, attempt to understand 
the concerns underlying that person's position.  Address those concerns in a creative and mutually 
beneficial way.