T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
relationship with the customer.  Th ey respond with a cheerful , positive desire to solve the problem in a 
way that will make the customer happy.  They treat the customer with such g race and respect, giving 
such second-mile service, that many of the cust omers don't even think of going anywhere else. 
   By recognizing that the P/PC Balance is necessary  to effectiveness in an interdependent reality, we 
can value our problems as opportunities to increase PC.  The Habits of Interdependence     With the paradigm of the Emotional Bank Account in mind, we're ready to move into the habits of 
Public Victory, or success in working with other people.  As we do, we can see how these habits work 
together to create effective interdependence.  We  can also see how powerfully scripted we are in other 
patterns of thought and behavior.    In addition, we can see on an even deeper level that effective in terdependence can only be achieved 
by truly independent people.  It is impossible to  achieve Public Victory with popular "Win-Win 
negotiation" techniques of "reflect ive listening" techniques or "creativ e problem-solving" techniques that 
focus on personality and truncate the vital character base.    Let's now focus on each of the Public Victory habits in depth.  
Habit 4:  Think Win-Win TM -- Princi ples of Interpersonal Leadership 
 
   We have committed the Golden Rule to  memory; let us now commit it to life. 
   -- Edwin Markha 
*         *  
   One time I was asked to work with a company whose president was very concerned about the lack 
of cooperation among his people.    "Our basic problem, Stephen, is that they're selfis h," he said.  "They just won't cooperate.  I know if 
they would cooperate, we could produce so much mo re.  Can you help us develop a human-relations 
program that will solve the problem?"    "Is your problem the people or the paradigm?" I asked.    "Look for yourself," he replied.    So I did.  And I found that there was a real se lfishness, and unwillingness to cooperate, a resistance 
to authority, defensive communication.  I could see that overdrawn Emotional Bank Accounts had 
created a culture of low trust.  But I pressed the question.    "Let's look at it deeper," I suggested.  "Why don't your people cooperate? What is the reward for 
not cooperating?"    "There's no reward for not cooperating," he assu red me.  "The rewards are much greater if they do 
cooperate.    "Are they?" I asked.  Behind a curtain on one wall of this man's office was a chart.  On the chart 
were a number of racehorses all lined up on a track.  Superimposed on  the face of each horse was the 
face of one of his managers.  At the end of the trac k was a beautiful travel poster of Bermuda, an idyllic 
picture of blue skies and fleecy clouds and a roma ntic couple walking hand in hand down a white 
sandy beach.    Once a week, this man would brin g all his people into this office and talk cooperation.  "Let's all 
work together.  We'll all make more money if we do ."  Then he would pull th e curtain and show them 
the chart.  "Now which of you is going to win the trip to Bermuda?"    It was like telling one flower to grow and wateri ng another, like saying "fir ings will continue until 
morale improves."  He wanted cooperation.  He wanted  his people to work together, to share ideas, to 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
all benefit from the effort.  But he was setting them up in competition with each other.  One 
manager's success meant failure for the other managers    As with many, many problems between people in business, family, and other relationships, the 
problem in this company was the result of a flawed  paradigm.  The president was trying to get the 
fruits of cooperation from a paradigm of competit ion.  And when it didn't work, he wanted a 
technique, a program, a quick-fix antido te to make his people cooperate. 
   But you can't change the fruit without changing  the root.  Working on th e attitudes and behaviors 
would have been hacking at the leaves.  So we focused instead on producing personal and 
organizational excellence in an entirely different way by developing information and reward systems 
which reinforced the value of cooperation.    Whether you are the president of a company or the janitor, the moment you step from independence 
into interdependence in any capacity, you step into  a leadership role.  You are in a position of 
influencing other people.  And the habit of effect ive interpersonal leadership is Think Win-Win. 
 Six Paradigms of Human Interaction     Win-win is not a technique; it 's a total philosophy of human interac tion.  In fact, it is one of six 
paradigms of interaction.  The alternative paradig ms are win-lose, lose-win, lose-lose, win, and 
Win-Win or No Deal TM  Win-Win     Win-win is a frame of mind and heart that consta ntly seeks mutual benefit in all human interactions.  
Win-win means that agreements or solutions are mu tually beneficial, mutually satisfying.  With a 
win-win solution, all parties feel good about the de cision and feel committed to the action plan.  
Win-win sees life as a cooperative, not a competitiv e arena.  Most people tend to think in terms of 
dichotomies: strong or weak, hardball or softball,  w i n  o r  l o s e .   B u t  t h a t  k i n d  o f  t h i n k i n g  i f  
fundamentally flawed.  It's based on power and posi tion rather than on princi ple.  Win-win is based 
on the paradigm that there is plenty for everybody, that one person's success is not achieved at the 
expense or exclusion of the success of others.    Win-win is a belief in the Third Alternative.  It's  not your way or my way; it's a better way, a higher 
way.  Win-Lose     One alternative to win-win is win-lose, the paradig m of the race to Bermuda.  It says "If I win, you 
lose.    In leadership style, win-lose is the authoritari an approach: "I get my way; you don't get yours."  
Win-lose people are prone to use position, power, cr edentials, possessions, or personality to get their 
way.    Most people have been deeply scripted in th e win-lose mentality since birth.  First and most 
important of the powerful forces at work is the family.  When one child is  compared with another -- 
when patience, understanding or love is given or wi thdrawn on the basis of such comparisons -- people 
are into win-lose thinking.  Whenever love is give n on a conditional basis, when someone has to earn 
love, what's being communicated to them is that they  are not intrinsically valuable or lovable.  Value 
does not lie inside them, it lies outside.  It's in comparison with somebody else or against some 
expectation.  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   And what happens to a youn g mind and heart, highly vulnerab le, highly dependent upon the 
support and emotional affirmation of the parents, in the face of conditional love? The child is molded, 
shaped, and programmed in the win-lose mentality.    "If I'm better than my brother, my parents will love me more."    "My parents don't love me as  much as they love my sister.  I must not be as valuable." 
   Another powerful scripting agen cy is the peer group.  A child first wants acceptance from his 
parents and then from his peers, whether they be siblings or friends.  And we all know how cruel 
peers sometimes can be.  They often accept or reje ct totally on the basis of conformity to their  
expectations and norms, providing additional scripting toward win-lose.    The academic world reinforces win-lose scripting .  The "normal distribution curve" basically says 
that you got an "A" because someone else got a "C."  It interprets an indivi dual's value by comparing 
him or her to everyone else.  No recognition is gi ven to intrinsic value; everyone is extrinsically 
defined.    "Oh, how nice to see you here at our PTA meeting.   You ought to be really proud of your daughter, 
Caroline.  She's in the upper 10 percent."    "That makes me feel good."    "But your son, Johnny, is in trouble.  He's in the lower quartile."    "Really? Oh, that's terrible! What can we do about it?"    What this kind of comparative information does n't tell you is that perhap s Johnny is going on all 
eight cylinders while Caroline is coas ting on four of her eight.  But people are not graded against their 
potential or against the full use of their present capaci ty.  They are graded in relation to other people.  
And grades are carriers of social value; they op en doors of opportunity or they close them.  
Competition, not cooperation, lies at the core of the educational process.  Cooperation, in fact, is usually associated with cheating.    Another powerful programming ag ent is athletics, particularly for young men in their high school or 
college years.  Often they develop the basic paradig m that life is a big game , a zero sum game where 
some win and some lose.  "Winning" is "beating" in the athletic arena.    Another agent is law.  We live in a litigious so ciety.  The first thing many people think about when 
they get into trouble is suing someone, taking him to  court, "winning" at someone else's expense.  But 
defensive minds are neither creative nor cooperative.    Certainly we need law or else society will deterio rate.  It provides survival, but it doesn't create 
synergy.  At best it results in compromise.  Law is  based on an adversarial concept.  The recent trend 
of encouraging lawyers and law schools to focus on pe aceable negotiation, the techniques of win-win, 
and the use of private courts, may not provide the ultimate solution, but it does reflect a growing 
awareness of the problem.    Certainly there is a place for win-lose thinking  in truly competitive and low-trust situations.  But 
most of life is not a competition.  We don't have  to live each day compet ing with our spouse, our 
children, our co-workers, our neighbors, and our fr iends.  "Who's winning in your marriage?" is a 
ridiculous question.  If both people aren't winning, both are losing.    Most of life is an interdependent, not an indepe ndent, reality.  Most results you want depend on 
cooperation between you and others.  And the win-lose  mentality is dysfunctional to that cooperation. 
 Lose-Win     Some people are progra mmed the other way -- lose-win. 
   "I lose, you win."    "Go ahead.  Have your way with me."    "Step on me again.  Everyone does." 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   "I'm a loser.  I've always been a loser." 
   "I'm a peacemaker.  I'll do anything to keep peace." 
   Lose-win is worse than win-lose because it ha s no standards -- no demands, no expectations, no 
vision.  People who think lose-win are usually quick to  please or appease.  They seek strength from 
popularity or acceptance.  They have little courage to express their own feelings and convictions and 
are easily intimidated by th e ego strength of others. 
   In negotiation, lose-win is seen as capitulation - -  g i v i n g  i n  o r  g i v i n g  u p .   I n  l e a d e r s h i p  s t y l e ,  i t ' s  
permissiveness or indulgence.  Lose-win means bein g a nice guy, even if "nice guys finish last. 
   Win-lose people love lose-win people because they can feed on them.  They love their weaknesses 
-- they take advantage of them.  Such weaknesses complement their strengths.    But the problem is that lose-win people bury a lot of feelings.  And unexpressed feelings never die; 
they're buried alive and come fo rth in uglier ways.  Psychosomatic illnesses, particularly of the 
respiratory, nervous, and circulatory systems ofte n are the reincarnation of cumulative resentment, 
deep disappointment, and disillusionment repressed by  the lose-win mentality.  Disproportionate rage 
or anger, overreaction to minor provocation, an d cynicism are other embodiments of suppressed 
emotion.    People who are constantly repressing, not transcend ing, feelings towards a higher meaning find that 
it affects the quality of their self-esteem and eventu ally the quality of their relationships with others. 
   Both win-lose and lose-win are weak positions, based in personal insecurities.  In the short run, 
win-lose will produce more results because it draws on the often considerable strengths and talents of 
the people at the top.  Lose-win is weak and chaotic from the outset. 
   Many executives, managers, and parents swing back  and forth, as if on a pendulum, from win-lose 
inconsideration to lose-win indulg ence.  When they can't stand co nfusion and lack of structure, 
direction, expectation, and discipline any longer, they  swing back to win-lose -- until guilt undermines 
their resolve and drives them back to lose-win -- until anger and frust ration drive them back to win-lose 
again.  Lose-Lose     When two win-lose people get together -- that  is, when two determined , stubborn, ego-invested 
individuals interact -- the result will be lose-lose.  Both will lose.  Both will become vindictive and 
want to "get back" or "get even," blind to the fact that murder is suicide, that revenge is a two-edged 
sword.    I know of a divorce in which the husband was dire cted by the judge to sell the assets and turn over 
half the proceeds to his ex-wife.  In compliance, he sold a car worth over $10,000 for $50 and gave $25 
to the wife.  When the wife protested, the court cl erk checked on the situation and discovered that the 
husband was proceeding in the same manner sy stematically through all of the assets. 
   Some people become so centered on an enemy,  so totally obsessed with the behavior of another 
person that they become blind to everything except thei r desire for that person to  lose, even if it means 
losing themselves.  Lose-lose is the philosophy  of adversarial conflict, the philosophy of war. 
   Lose-lose is also the philosophy of the highly  dependent person without inner direction who is 
miserable and thinks everyone else should be, too.  "If nobody ever wins, perh aps being a loser isn't so 
bad.  Win     Another common alternative is simply to th ink win.  People with the win mentality don't 
necessarily want someone else to lose.  That's irre levant.  What matters is that they get what they 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
want. 
   When there is no sense of contest or competit ion, win is probably the most common approach in 
everyday negotiation.  A person with the win menta lity thinks in terms of securing his own ends -- 
and leaving it to others to secure theirs.   Which Option Is Best?     Of these five philosophies discussed so far -- win-win, win-lose, lose-win, lose-lose, and win -- 
which is the most effective?  The answer is, "It depends." If you win a football game, that means the 
other team loses.  If you work in a regional office that is miles away from another regional office, and 
you don't have any functional relationship between th e offices, you may want to compete in a win-lose 
situation to stimulate business.  However, you would not want to set up a win-lose situation like the 
"Race to Bermuda" contest within a company or in a situation where you need cooperation among 
people or groups of people to achieve maximum success.    If you value a relationship and the issue isn't rea lly that important, you may want to go for lose-win 
in some circumstances to genuinely affirm the other person.  "What I want isn't as important to me as 
my relationship with you.  Let's do it your way this  time."  You might also go for lose-win if you feel 
the expense of time and effort to achieve a win of any kind would violate other higher values.  Maybe 
it just isn't worth it.    There are circumstances in which you would want  to win, and you wouldn 't be highly concerned 
with the relationship of that win to others.  If yo ur child's life were in danger, for example, you might 
be peripherally concerned about other people and circumstances.  But saving that life would be 
supremely important.    The best choice, then, depends on reality.  The ch allenge is to read that reality accurately and not to 
translate win-lose or other scripting into every situation.    Most situations, in fact, are part of an interdep endent reality, and then wi n-win is really the only 
viable alternative of the five.    Win-lose is not viable because, although I appe ar to win in a confrontation with you, your feelings, 
your attitudes toward me and our relationship have b een affected.  If I am a supplier to your company, 
for example, and I win on my terms in a particular negotiation, I may get what I want now.  But will 
you come to me again?  My short-term win will real ly be a long-term lose if I don't get your repeat 
business.  So an interdependent win-lose  is really lose-lose in the long run. 
   If we come up with a lose-win, you may appe ar to get what you want for the moment.  But how 
will that affect my attitude about working with you,  about fulfilling the contrac t?  I may not feel as 
anxious to please you.  I may carry battle scars wi th me into any future negotiations.  My attitude 
about you and your company may be spread as I associ ate with others in the in dustry.  So we're into 
lose-lose again.  Lose-lose obviou sly isn't viable in any context. 
   And if I focus on my own win and don't even co nsider your point of view,  there's no basis for any 
kind of productive relationship.    In the long run, if it isn't a win for both of us , we both lose.  That's why win-win is the only real 
alternative in interdependent realities.    I worked with a client once, the president of a large chain of retail stores, who said, "Stephen, this 
win-win idea sounds good, but it is so idealistic.  The tough, realistic business world isn't like that.  
There's win-lose everywhere, and if you're not out there playing the game, you just can't make it." 
   "All right," I said, "try going for win-lose  with your customers.  Is that realistic?" 
   "Well, no," he replied.    "Why not?" 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   "I'd lose my customers." 
   "Then, go for lose-win -- give the store away.  Is that realistic?"    "No.  No margin, no mission."    As we considered the various alternatives, win-win appeared to be the only truly realistic approach.    "I guess that's true with customers, " he admitted, "but not with suppliers." 
   "You are the customer of the supplier," I said.  "Why doesn't the same principle apply?" 
   "Well, we recently renegotiated our lease agreem ents with the mall operators and owners," he said.  
"We went in with a win-win attitude.  We were op en, reasonable, conciliatory.  But they saw that 
position as being soft and weak, an d they took us to the cleaners." 
   "Well, why did you go for lose-win?" I asked.    "We didn't.  We went for win-win."    "I thought you said they  took you to the cleaners." 
   "They did."    "In other words, you lost."    "That's right."    "And they won."    "That's right."    "So what's that called?"     When he realized that what he had called wi n-win was really lose-win, he was shocked.  And as 
we examined the long-term impact of  that lose-win, the suppressed f eelings, the trampled values, the 
resentment that seethed under the surface of the relati onship, we agreed that it was really a loss for both 
parties in the end.    If this man had had a real win-win attitude, he would have stayed longer in the communication 
process, listened to the mall owner more, then expre ssed his point of view with more courage.  He 
would have continued in the win-win spirit until a so lution was reached and they both felt good about 
it.  And that solution, that Third Alternative, would have b een synergistic -- probably something 
neither of them had thought of on his own.  Win-Win or No Deal TM     If these individuals had not come up with a syne rgistic solution -- one that  was agreeable to both -- 
they could have gone for an even higher ex pression of win-win, Win-Win or No Deal. 
   No deal basically means that if we can't find a solution that would benefit us both, we agree to 
disagree agreeably -- no deal.  No expectations have been created, no performance contracts established.  I don't hire you or we don't take on a particular assignment together because it's obvious 
that our values or our goals are going in opposite di rections.  It is so much better to realize this up 
front instead of downstream when expectations have been created and bo th parties have been 
disillusioned.    When you have no deal as an option in your mind, you feel liberated beca use you have no need to 
manipulate people, to push your own agenda, to drive for what you want.  You can be open.  You can 
really try to understand the deeper issues underlying the positions.    With no deal as an option, you can honestly say, "I only want to go for win-win.  I want to win, and I want you to win.  I wouldn't want to get my way and have you not feel good about it, because 
downstream it would eventually surface and create  a withdrawal.  On the other hand, I don't think 
you would feel good if you got your way and I gave in.  So let's work for a win-win.  Let's really 
hammer it out.  And if we can't find it, then let's agree that we won't ma ke a deal at all.  It would be 
better not to deal than to live with a decision that wasn't right for us both.  Then maybe another time 
we might be able to get together." 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Some time after learning the concept of Win-Win or No Deal, th e president of a small computer 
software company shared with me the following experience: 
   "We had developed new software which we sold on a five-year contract to a particular bank.  The 
bank president was excited about it, but his people weren't really behind the decision.    "About a month later, that bank  changed presidents.  The new presid ent came to me and said, 'I am 
uncomfortable with these software conversions.  I have a mess on my hands.  My people are all 
saying that they can't go through this and I really feel I just can't push it at this point in time.' 
   "My own company was in deep financial trouble.  I knew I had every legal right to enforce the contract.  But I had become convinced of the value of the principle of win-win.    "So I told him 'We have a contract.  Your bank has secured our products and our services to convert 
you to this program.  But we understand that you're not happy about it.  So what we'd like to do is 
give you back the contract, give you back your depo sit, and if  you are ever looking for a software 
solution in the future, come back and see us.' 
   "I literally walked away from an $84,000 contract.  It was close to financial suicide.  But I felt that, 
in the long run, if the principle were tr ue, it would come back and pay dividends. 
   "Three months later, the new president called me .  'I'm now going to make changes in my date 
processing,' he said, 'and I want to do busi ness with you.' He signed a contract for $240,000." 
   Anything less than win-win in an  interdependent reality is a poor second best that will have impact 
in the long-term relationship.  The cost of the impact  needs to be carefully considered.  If  you can't 
reach a true win-win, you're very often better off to go for no deal.    Win-Win or No Deal provides tremendous emotio nal freedom in the family relationship.  If family 
members can't agree on a video that everyone will enjoy,  they can simply decide to do something else -- 
no deal -- rather than having some enjo y the evening at the expense of others. 
   I have a friend whose family has been involved  in singing together for several years.  When they 
were young, she arranged the music, made the costumes, accompanied th em on the piano, and directed 
the performances.    As the children grew older, their taste in music be gan to change and they wanted to have more say 
in what they performed and what they wore.  They became less responsive to direction. 
   Because she had years of experience in performing  herself and felt closer to the needs of the older 
people at the rest homes where they planned to perf orm, she didn't feel that  many of the ideas they 
were suggesting would be appropriate.  At the sa me time, however, she recognized their need to 
express themselves and to be part of the decision-making process.    So she set up a Win-Win or No Deal.  She told  them she wanted to arrive at an agreement that 
everyone felt good about -- or they would simply fi nd other ways to enjoy their talents.  As a result, 
everyone felt free to express his or her feelings  and ideas as they worked to set up a Win-Win 
Agreement, knowing that whether or not they could agree, there would be no emotional strings. 
   The Win-Win or No Deal approach is most realis tic at the beginning of a business relationship or 
enterprise.  In a continuing business relationship, no  deal may not be a viable option, which can create 
serious problems, especially for family businesses or businesses that are begun initially on the basis of 
friendship.    In an effort to preserve th e relationship, people sometimes go on for years making one compromise 
after another, thinking win-lose or lose-win even wh ile talking win-win.  This creates serious problems 
for the people and for the business, particularly if the competition operates on win-win and synergy. 
   Without no deal, many such businesses simply dete riorate and either fail or have to be turned over 
to professional managers.  Experience shows that it is often better in setting up a family business or a 
business between friends to acknowle dge the possibility of no deal downstream and to establish some 
kind of buy/sell agreement so that the busine ss can prosper without permanently damaging the 
relationship. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Of course there are some relationships where no deal is not viable.  I wouldn't abandon my child or 
my spouse and go for no deal (it would be better, if  necessary, to go for compromise -- a low form of 
win-win).  But in many cases, it is possible to go  into negotiation with a full Win-Win or No Deal 
attitude.  And the freedom in the attitude is incredible.  Five Dimensions of Win-Win     Think Win-Win is the habit of interpersonal lead ership.  It involves the exercise of each of the 
unique human endowments -- self-awareness, imaginat ion, conscience, and independent will -- in our 
relationships with others.  It involves mutual  learning, mutual influence, mutual benefits. 
   It takes great courage as well as consideration to  create these mutual bene fits, particularly if we're 
interacting with others who are deeply scripted in win-los.    That is why this habit involves principles of  interpersonal leadership.  Effective interpersonal 
leadership requires the vision, the proactive initia tive, and the security, guidance, wisdom, and power 
that come from principle-ce ntered personal leadership. 
   The principle of win-win is fundamental to succe ss in all our interactions, and  it embraces five 
interdependent dimensions of life.  It begins wi th character and moves toward relationships, out of 
which flow agreements.  It is nurtured in an en vironment where structure and systems are based on 
win-win.  And it involves process; we cannot achiev e win-win ends with win-lose or lose-win means. 
   The following diagram shows how these five dimensions relate to each other. 
   Now let's consider each of the five dimensions in turn.  Character     Character is the foundation of win-win, and ever ything else builds on that foundation.  There are 
three character traits essential to the win-win paradigm.    INTEGRITY.  We've already defined integrity as the value we place on ourselves.  Habits 1, 2, and 
3 help us develop and maintain integrity.  As we cl early identify our values and proactively organize 
and execute around those values on a daily basis, we develop self-awareness and independent will by 
making and keeping meaningful promises and commitments.    There's no way to go for a win in our own liv es if we don't even know, in a deep sense, what 
constitutes a win -- what is, in fact, harmonious wi th our innermost values.  And if we can't make and 
keep commitments to ourselves as well as to others , our commitments become meaningless.  We know 
it; others know it.  They sense duplicity and beco me guarded.  There's no foundation of trust and 
win-win becomes an ineffective superficial technique.   Integrity is the cornerstone in the foundation. 
   MATURITY.  Maturity is the balance between cou rage and consideration.  If a person can express 
his feelings and convictions with courage balanced with consideration for the feelings and convictions 
of another person, he is mature , particularly if the issue is ve ry important to both parties. 
   If you examine many of the psychological tests used for hiring, promoting, and training purposes, 
you will find that they are designed to evaluate th is kind of maturity.  Whether it's called the ego 
strength/empathy balance, the self confidence /respect for others balance, the concern for 
people/concern for tasks balance, "I'm okay, you're okay" in transact ional analysis language, or 9.1, 1.9, 
5.5, 9.9, in management grid language -- the quality soug ht for is the balance of what I call courage and 
consideration.    Respect for this quality is deeply ingrained in the theory of human in teraction, management, and 
leadership.  It is a deep embodiment of the P/PC Balance.  While courage may focus on getting the 
golden egg, consideration deals with the long-term we lfare of the other stakeholders.  The basic task of 
leadership is to increase the standard of living and the quali ty of life for all stakeholders. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Many people think in dichotomies, in either/or terms.  They think if you're nice, you're not tough.  
But win-win is nice...and tough.  It's twice as tough as win-lose.  To go for win-win, you not only have 
to be nice, you have to be courageous.  You not only  have to be empathic, you have to be confident.  
You not only have to be considerate and sensitive, yo u have to be brave.  To do that, to achieve that 
balance between courage and consideration, is the essence of real maturity and is fundamental to 
win-win.    If I'm high on courage and low on consideratio n, how will I think?  Win-lose.  I'll be strong and 
ego bound.  I'll have the courage of my convictions, but I won't be very considerate of yours.    To compensate for my lack of internal matu rity and emotional strength, I might borrow strength 
from my position and power, or from my cr edentials, my seniority, my affiliation. 
   If I'm high on consideration and low on courage,  I'll think lose-win.  I'll be so considerate of your 
convictions and desires that I won't have th e courage to express and actualize my own. 
   High courage and consideration are both essential to win-win.  It is the balance that is the mark of real maturity.  If I have it, I ca n listen, I can empathically unders tand, but I can also courageously 
confront.    ABUNDANCE MENTALITY TM.  The third characte r trait essential to win-win is the Abundance 
Mentality, the paradigm that there is plenty out there for everybody. 
   Most people are deeply scripted in what I call the Scarcity Mentality.  They see life as having only 
so much, as though there were only one pie out ther e.  And if someone were to get a big piece of the 
pie, it would mean less for everybody else.  The Sc arcity Mentality is the zero-sum paradigm of life. 
   People with a Scarcity Mentality have a very diffi cult time sharing recognition and credit, power or 
profit -- even with those who help in the production.  They also have a very hard time being genuinely 
happy for the successes of other people -- even, and sometimes especially, members of their own family 
or close friends and associates.  It's almost as if  something is being taken from them when someone 
else receives special recognition or windfall ga in or has remarkable success or achievement. 
   Although they might verbally express happiness for others' success, inwardly they are eating their 
hearts out.  Their sense of worth comes from being compared, and someone else's success, to some degree, means their failure.  Only so many people  can be "A" students; only one person can be 
"number one." To "win" simply means to "beat."    Often, people with a Scarcity Mentality harbor secret hopes that others might suffer misfortune -- 
not terrible misfortune, but acceptable misfortune that would keep them "in their place."  They're 
always comparing, always competing.  They give thei r energies to possessing things or other people in 
order to increase their sense of worth.    They want other people to be the way they want  them to be.  They often want to clone them, and 
they surround themselves with "yes" people -- pe ople who won't challenge them, people who are 
weaker than they.    It's difficult for people with a Scarcity Menta lity to be members of a complementary team.  They 
look on differences as signs of  insubordination and disloyalty. 
   The Abundance Mentality, on the other hand, flow s out of a deep inner sense of personal worth and 
security.  It is the paradigm that there is plenty out there and enough to spare for everybody.  It 
results in sharing of prestige, of recognition, of profits, of decision making.  It opens possibilities, 
options, alternatives, and creativity.    The Abundance Mentality takes the personal joy,  satisfaction, and fulfillment of Habits 1, 2, and 3 
and turns it outward, appreciating the uniqueness, the inner direction, the proactive nature of others.  
It recognizes the unlimited possibilities for positive  interactive growth and de velopment, creating new 
Third Alternatives.    Public Victory does not mean victory over other people.  It means success in effective interaction 
that brings mutually beneficial results to everyone  involved.  Public Victory means working together, 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
communicating together, making things happen togeth er that even the same people couldn't make 
happen by working independently.  And Public Vict ory is an outgrowth of the Abundance Mentality 
paradigm.    A character rich in integrity, maturity, and the Abundance Mentality has a genuineness that goes far 
beyond technique, or lack of it, in human interaction.    One thing I have found particularly helpful to wi n-lose people in developing a win-win character is 
to associate with some model or mentor who really thinks win-win.  When people are deeply scripted 
in win-lose or other philosophies and regularly asso ciate with others who are likewise scripted, they 
don't have much opportunity to see and experien ce the win-win philosop h y  i n  a c t i o n .   S o  I  
recommend reading literature, such as the inspiring biography of Anwar Sadat, In Search of Identity, 
and seeing movies like Chariots of Fire or plays like Les Miserables that expose you to models of 
win-win.    But remember: If we search deeply enough with in ourselves -- beyond the scripting, beyond the 
learned attitudes and behaviors -- the real validation of  win-win, as well as every other correct principle, 
is in our own lives.  Relationships     From the foundation of character, we build and maintain win-win relationships.  The trust, the 
Emotional Bank Account, is the esse nce of win-win.  Without trust, the best we can do is compromise; 
without trust, we lack the credibility for open, mutu al learning and communication and real creativity. 
   But if our Emotional Bank Account is high, credib ility is no longer an issue.  Enough deposits have 
been made so that you know and I know that we deeply respect each other.  We're focused on the 
issues, not on personalities or positions.    Because we trust each other, we're open.  We put our cards on the table.  Even though we see 
things differently, I know that you're willing to liste n with respect while I describe the young woman to 
you, and you know that I'll treat your description of  the old woman with the same respect.  We're both 
committed to try to understand each other's point of  view deeply and to work together for the Third 
Alternative, the synergistic solution, that will be a better answer for both of us. 
   A relationship where bank accounts are high and both parties are deeply committed to win-win is 
the ideal springboard for tremendous synergy (Habit 6).  That relationship neither makes  the issues 
any less real or important, nor elim inates the differences in perspect ive.  But it does eliminate the 
negative energy normally focused on differences in  personality and position and creates a positive, 
cooperative energy focused on thoroughly understand ing the issue and resolving them in a mutually 
beneficial way.    But what if that kind of relationship isn't ther e?  What if you have to work out an agreement with 
someone who hasn't even heard of win-win and is  deeply scripted in win-lose or some other 
philosophy?    Dealing with win-lose is the real test of wi n-win.  Rarely is win-win easily achieved in any 
circumstance.  Deep issues and fundamental differences  have to be dealt with.  But it is much easier 
when both parties are aware of and committed to it and where there is a high Emotional Bank Account 
in the relationship.    When you're dealing with a person who is coming  from a paradigm of win-lose, the relationship is 
still the key.  The place to focus is on your Circle of Influence.  You make deposits into the Emotional 
Bank Account through genuine courtesy, respect, an d appreciation for that person and for the other 
point of view.  You stay longer in the communicat ion process.  You listen more, you listen in greater 
depth.  You express yourself with greater courage.   You aren't reactive.  You go deeper inside 
yourself for strength of character to be proactive.  You keep hammering it out until the other person 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
begins to realize that you genuinely want the resoluti on to be a real win for both of you.  That very 
process is a tremendous deposit in the Emotional Bank Account. 
    And the stronger you are -- the more genuine yo ur character, the higher your level of proactivity, 
the more committed you really are to win-win -- the more powerful your influence will be with that 
other person.  This is the real test of interpersonal leadership.  It goes beyond  transactional leadership 
into transformational leadership, transforming the individuals involved as well as the relationship. 
   Because win-win is a principle people can validat e in their own lives, you will be able to bring most 
people to a realization that they will win more of what they want by going for what you both want.  
But there will be a few who are so deeply embedded in the win-lose mentalit y that they just won't 
Think Win-Win.  So remember that no deal is always an option.  Or you may occasionally choose to 
go for the low form of win-win -- compromise.    It's important to realize that not all decisions need to be win-win, even  when the Emotional Bank 
Account is high.  Again, the key is the relationship .  If you and I worked to gether, for example, and 
you were to come to me and say, "Stephen, I know yo u won't like this decision.  I don't have time to 
explain it to you, let alone get you involved.  Ther e's a good possibility you'll think it's wrong.  But 
will you support it?"    If you had a positive Emotional Bank Account wi th me, of course I'd support it.  I'd hope you were 
right and I was wrong.  I'd work to make your decision work.    But if the Emotional Bank Account weren't there, an d if I were reactive, I wouldn't really support it.  
I might say I would to your face, but behind your ba ck I wouldn't be very enthusiastic.  I wouldn't 
make the investment necessary to make it succeed.  "It didn't work," I'd say.  "So what do you want 
me to do now?"    If I were overreactive, I might even torpedo your decision and do wh at I could to make sure others 
did too.  Or I might become "maliciously obedient " and do exactly and only what you tell me to do, 
accepting no responsibility for results.    During the five years I lived in Great Britain, I saw that country brought twice to its knees because the train conductors were maliciously obedient in following all the rules and procedures written on 
paper.    An agreement means very little in letter without the character and relationship  base to sustain it in 
spirit.  So we need to approach win-win from a genuin e desire to invest in the relationships that make 
it possible.  Agreements     From relationships flow the agreements that gi ve definition and direction to win-win.  They are 
sometimes called performance agreements or partne rship agreements, or shifting the paradigm of 
productive interaction from vertical to horizontal, from hovering supervision to self-supervision, from 
positioning to being partners in success.    Win-Win Agreements cover a wide scope of interdependent interaction.  We discussed one 
important application when we talked about delegation in the "Green and Clean" story in Habit 3.  The 
same five elements we listed there provide the st ructure for Win-Win Agreements between employers 
and employees, between independent people working to gether on projects, bet ween groups of people 
cooperatively focused on a common objective, bet ween companies and suppliers  -- between any people 
who need to interact to accomplish.  They create an  effective way to clarify and manage expectations 
between people involved in any .interdependent endeavor. 
   Desired results (not methods) iden tify what is to be done and when. 
 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Guidelines specify the parameters (principles,  policies, etc.) within which results are to be 
accomplished    Resources identify the human, financial, technical, or organizational support available to help accomplish the results.    Accountability sets up the standards of performance and the time of evaluation.    Consequences specify -- good and bad, natural an d logical -- what does and will happen as a result 
of the evaluation.    These five elements give Win-Win Agreements a life of their own.  A clear mutual understanding 
and agreement up front in these areas creates a st andard against which people can measure their own 
success.    Traditional authoritarian supervision is a win-lose  paradigm.  It's also the result of an overdrawn 
Emotional Bank Account.  If you don't have trust or common vision of desire d results, you tend to 
hover over, check up on, and direct.  Trust isn't there,  so you feel as though you have to control people. 
   But if the trust account is high, what is your me thod?  Get out of  their way.  As long as you have 
an up-front Win-Win Agreement and they know exactly what  is expected, your role is to be a source of  
help and to receive their accountability reports.    It is much more ennobling to the human spirit to let people judge themselves than to judge them.  
And in a high-trust culture, it's much more accurate.  In many case s people know in their hearts how 
things are going much better than the records show .  Discernment is often far more accurate than 
either observation or measurement.  Win-Win Management Training     Several years ago, I was indirectly involved in a consulting project with a very large banking 
institution that had scores of branches.  They wa nted us to evaluate and improve their management 
training program, which was supported by an annual budget of $750,000.  The program involved 
selecting college graduates and putting them th rough twelve two-week assignments in various 
departments over a six-month period of time so that  they could get a general sense of the industry.  
They spent two week in commercial loans, two weeks in  industrial loans, two weeks in marketing, two 
week in operations, and so forth.  At the end of th e six-month period, they were assigned as assistant 
managers in the various branch banks.    Our assignment was to evaluate the six-month formal training period.  As we began, we discovered 
that the most difficult part  of the assignment was to get a clear pi cture of the desired results.  We asked 
the top executives the key hard question: "What should these people be able to do when they finish the 
program?" And the answers we got were vague and often contradictory.    The training program dealt with methods, not re sults; so we suggested that they set up a pilot 
training program based on a different paradigm call ed "learner-controlled instruction."  This was a 
Win-Win Agreement that involved identifying specific  objectives and criteria that would demonstrate 
their accomplishment and identifying the guidelines, resources, accoun tability, and consequences that 
would result when the objectives wer e met.  The consequences in this case were promotion to assistant 
manager, where they would receive the on-the-job part  of their training, and a significant increase in 
salary.    We had to really press to get the objectives hammered out.  "What is it you want them to understand about accounting?  Wh at about marketing?  What abou t real estate loans?"  And we 
went down the list.  They finally came up with over 100 objectives, which we simplified, reduced, and 
consolidated until we came down to 39 specific behavioral objectives with criteria attached to them.    The trainees were highly moti vated by both the oppo rtunity and the increase d salary to meet the 
criteria as soon as possible.  There was a big win in it for them, and there was also a big win for the 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
company because they would have assistant branch ma nagers who met results-oriented criteria instead 
of just showing up for 12 different activity traps.    So we explained the difference between lear ner-controlled instruction and system-controlled 
instruction to the trainees.  We ba sically said, "Here are the objectives  and the criteria.  Here are the 
resources, including learning from each other.  So go to it.  As soon as you meet the criteria, you will 
be promoted to assistant managers.    They were finished in thr ee and a half weeks.  Shifting th e training paradigm had released 
unbelievable motivation and creativity    As with many Paradigm Shifts, there was resist ance.  Almost all of the top executives simply 
wouldn't believe it.  When they were shown the eviden ce that the criteria had been met, they basically 
said, "These trainees don't have the experience.  Th ey lack the seasoning necessary to give them the 
kind of judgment we want them to have as assistant branch managers."    In talking with them later, we found that what  many of them were really saying was, "We went 
through goat week; how come these guys don't have to?"  But of course they couldn't put it that way.  
"They lack seasoning" was a much more acceptable expression.    In addition, for obvious reasons (including  the $750,000 budget for a six-month program), the 
personnel department was upset.    So we responded, "Fair enough.  Let's develop so me more objectives and attach criteria to them.  
But let's stay with the paradigm of learner-contr olled instruction."  We hammered out eight more 
objectives with very tough criteria in order to gi ve the executives the assu rance that the people were 
adequately prepared to be assistant branch managers and continue the on-the-job part of the training 
program.  After participating in some of the session s where these criteria were developed, several of 
the executives remarked that if the trainees coul d meet these tough criter ia, they would be better 
prepared than almost any who had gone through the six-month program.    We had prepared the trainees to expect resistance .  We took the additional objectives and criteria 
back to them and said, "Just as we expected, management wants you to accomplish some additional objectives with even tougher criteria than before.  Th ey have assured us this time that if you meet these 
criteria, they will make you assistant managers."    They went to work in unbelievable ways.  Th ey went to the executives in departments such as 
accounting and basically said, "Sir, I am a member of this new pilot program called learner-controlled 
instruction, and it is my understanding that you participated in developing the objectives and the 
criteria."    "I have six criteria to meet in this particular department.  I was able to pass three of them off with 
skills I gained in college; I was able  to get another one out of a book; I learned the fifth one from Tom, 
the fellow you trained last week.  I only have one criterion left to meet, and I wonder if you or 
someone else in the department might be able to spend a few hours with me to show me how."  So 
they spent a half a day in a de partment instead of two weeks. 
   These trainees cooperated with each other, b rainstormed with each other, and they accomplished 
the additional objectives in a week and a half.  Th e six-month program was reduced to five weeks, and 
the results were significantly increased.    This kind of thinking can similarly affect every area of organizational life if  people have the courage 
to explore their paradigms and to concentrate on wi n-win.  I am always amazed at the results that 
happen, both to individuals and to organizations , when responsible, proactive, self-directing 
individuals are turned loose on a task.  Win-Win Performance Agreements   
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Creating Win-Win Performance Agreements requires  vital Paradigm Shifts.  The focus is on results; 
not methods.  Most of us tend to supervise method s.  We use the gofer delegation discussed in Habit 
3, the methods management I used with Sandra when I asked her to take pictures of our son as he was 
waterskiing.  But Win-Win Agreements focus on results, releasing tremendous individual human 
potential and creating greater synergy, building PC in  the process instead of focusing exclusively on P 
   With win-win accountability, people evaluate th emselves.  The traditional evaluation games people 
play are awkward and emotionally exhausting.  In win-win, people  evaluate themselves, using the 
criteria that they themselves helped to create up fr ont.  And if you set it up correctly, people can do 
that.  With a Win-Win Delegation Agreement, even  a seven-year-old boy can tell for himself how well 
he's keeping the yard "green and clean."    My best experiences in teaching university cla sses have come when I have created a win-win shared 
understanding of the goal up front.  "This is what  we're trying to accomplish.  Here are the basic 
requirements for an A, B, or C grad e.  My goal is to help every on e of you get an A.  Now you take 
what we've talked about and analyze it and come up  with your own understanding of what you want 
to accomplish that is unique to you.  Then let's ge t together and agree on th e grade you wa nt and what 
you plan to do to get it."    Management philosopher and consultant Peter Dr ucker recommends the use of a "manager's letter" 
to capture the essence of perfor mance agreements between managers and their employees.  Following 
a deep and thorough discussion of expectations, guid elines, and resources to make sure they are in 
harmony with organizational goals,  the employee writes a letter to the manager that summarizes the 
discussion and indicates when the next performa nce plan or review discussion will take place. 
   Developing such a Win-Win Agreement is the ce ntral activity of management.  With an agreement 
in place, employees can manage themselves within  the framework of that agreement.  The manager 
then can serve like a pace car in a race.  He can get things going and then get out of the way.  His job 
from then on is to remove the oil spills.    When a boss becomes the first a ssistant to each of his subordinates , he can greatly increase his span 
of control.  Entire levels of administrations and ov erhead are eliminated.  Instead of supervising six or 
eight, such a manager can supervise twenty, thirty, fifty, or more.    In Win-Win Agreements, consequences become th e natural or logical results of performance rather 
than a reward or punishment arbitrarily handed out by the person in charge. 
   There are basically four kinds of consequences (rewards and penalties) that management or parents 
can control -- financial, psychic, opportunity, and responsibility.  Financial consequences include such 
things as income, stock options, allowances, or pe nalties.  Psychic or psychological consequences 
include recognition, approval, respect, credibility, or  the loss of them.  Unless people are in a survival 
mode, psychic compensation is often more motiva ting than financial compensation.  Opportunity 
includes training, development, perks, and other be nefits.  Responsibility has to do with scope and 
authority, either of which can be enlarged or di minished.  Win-Win Agreements specify consequences 
in one or more of those areas and the people involved  know it up front.  So you don't play games.  
Everything is clear from the beginning.    In addition to these logical, personal consequenc es, it is also important to  clearly identify what the 
natural organizational consequences are.  For example, what will happen if I'm la te to work, if I refuse 
to cooperate with others, if I don't develop good Wi n-Win Agreements with my subordinates, if I don't 
hold them accountable for desired results, or if I don't promote their professional growth and career 
development.    When my daughter turned 16, we set up a Win- Win Agreement regarding use of the family car.  
We agreed that she would obey the laws of the land  and that she would keep the car clean and properly 
maintained.  We agreed that she would use the car only for responsi ble purposes and would serve as a 
cab driver for her mother and me within reason.  And we also agreed that sh e would do all her other 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
jobs cheerfully without being reminded.  These were our wins. 
   We also agreed that I would provide some re sources -- the car, gas, and insurance.  And we agreed 
that she would meet weekly with me, usually on Sunday afternoon, to evaluate how she was doing 
based on our agreement.  The consequences were clear.  As long as she kept he r part of the agreement, 
she could use the car.  If she didn't keep it, sh e would lose the privilege until she decided to. 
   This Win-Win Agreement set up clear expectations  from the beginning on both our parts.  It was a 
win for her -- she got to use the car -- and it was certainly a win for Sandra and me.  Now she could 
handle her own transportation needs and even so me of ours.  We didn't have to worry about 
maintaining the car or keeping it clean.  And we had a built-in acco untability, which meant I didn't 
have to hover over her to manage her methods.  Her integrity, her conscience, her power of discernment and our high Emotional Bank Account ma naged her infinitely better.  We didn't have to 
get emotionally strung out, trying to supervise he r every move and coming up with punishments or 
rewards on the spot if she didn't do things the way we thought she should.  We had a Win-Win 
Agreement, and it liberated us all.    Win-Win Agreements are tremendously liberating.  But as the product of isolated techniques, they 
won't hold up.  Even if you set them up in the be ginning, there is no way to maintain them without 
personal integrity and relationship of trust.    A true Win-Win Agreement is the product of the paradigm, the character, and the relationships out 
of which it grows.  In this context, it defines and directs the interdependent in teraction of which it was 
created.    Win-win can only survive in an  organization when the systems support it.  If you talk win-win but 
reward win-lose, you've got a losing program on your hands.    You basically get what you reward.  If you want to achieve the goals and reflect the values in your 
mission statement, then you need to  align the reward system with thes e goals and values.  If it isn't 
aligned systematically, you won't be walking your ta lk.  You'll be in the situation of the manager I 
mentioned earlier who talked cooperation but practi ced competition by creating a "Race to Bermuda" 
contest.    I worked for several years with a very large real estate organization in the Middle West.  My first experience with this organization was at a large sale s rally where over 800 sales associates gathered for 
the annual reward program.  It was a psych-up cheer leading session, complete with high school bands 
and a great deal of frenzied screaming.    Out of the 800 people there, around 40 received awards for top performance, such as "Most Sales," 
"Greatest Volume," "Highest Earned Commissions," an d "Most Listings."  There was a lot of hoopla -- 
excitement, cheering, applause -- around the presentation of these aw ards.  There was no doubt that 
those 40 people had won; but there was also the underlying awareness that 760 people had lost.    We immediately began educational and organizat ional development work to align the systems and 
structures of the organization toward the win-win paradigm.  We involved people at a grass-roots 
level to develop the kinds of systems that would motivate them.  We also encouraged them to 
cooperate and synergize with each other so that as many as possible could achieve the desired results of 
their individually tailored performance agreements.    At the next rally one year later, there were over  1,000 sales associates present, and about 800 of them 
received awards.  There were a few individual winners based on comparisons, but the program 
primarily focused on people achieving self-selecte d performance objectives and on groups achieving 
team objectives.  There was no need to bring in the high school bands to artificially contrive the fanfare, 
the cheerleading, and the psych up.  There was trem endous natural interest and excitement because 
people could share in each others' happiness, and te ams of sales associates could experience rewards 
together, including a vacation trip for the entire office.  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   The remarkable thing was that almost all of the 800 who received the awards that year had 
produced as much per person in terms of volume an d profit as the previous year's 40.  The spirit of 
win-win had significantly increased the number of go lden eggs and had fed the goose as well, releasing 
enormous human energy and talent.  The resultin g synergy was astounding to almost everyone 
involved.    Competition has its place in the marketplace or against last ye ar's performance -- perhaps even 
against another office or individual where there is no  particular interdependence, no need to cooperate.  
But cooperation in the workplace is as important to free enterprise as competition in the marketplace.  
The spirit of win-win cannot survive in an  environment of competition and contests. 
   For win-win to work, the systems have to support  it.  The training system, the planning system, the 
communication system, the budgeting system, the in formation system, the comp ensation system -- all 
have to be based on the principle of win-win.    I did some consulting for another company that wa nted training for their people in human relations.  
The underlying assumption was th at the problem was the people. 
   The president said, "Go into any store you want  and see how they treat you.  They're just order 
takers.  They don't understand how to get close to the customers.  They don't know the product  and 
they don't have the knowledge and the skill in the sales process nece ssary to create a marriage between 
the product and the need."    So I went to the various stores.  And he was righ t.  But that still didn't answer the question in my 
mind: What caused the attitude?    "Look, we're on top of the problem," the pres ident said.  "We have department heads out there 
setting a great example.  We've told them their job is two-thirds selling and one-third management, 
and they're outselling everybody.  We just want yo u to provide some training for the salespeople. 
   Those words raised a red flag.  "Let's get some more data," I said.    He didn't like that.  He "knew" what the proble m was, and he wanted to get on with training.  But 
I persisted, and within two days we uncovered the real  problem.  Because of the job definition and the 
compensation system, the managers were "creaming. "  They'd stand behind the cash register and 
cream all the business durin
g the slow times.  Half the time in retail is slow and the other half is frantic.  
So the managers would give all the dirty jobs -- in ventory control, stock work, and cleaning -- to the 
salespeople.  And they would stand behind the re gisters and cream.  That's why the department 
heads were top in sales.    So we changed one system -- the compensation system -- and the problem was corrected overnight.  
We set up a system whereby the managers only made money when their salespeople made money.  
We overlapped the needs and goals of the managers wi th the needs and goals of the salespeople.  And 
the need for human-relations training suddenly disappeared.  The key was developing a true win-win reward system.    In another instance, I worked with a manage r in a company that required formal performance 
evaluation.  He was frustrated over the evaluation  rating he had given a particular manager.  "He 
deserved a three," he said, "but I had to give him a one" (which meant superior, promotable). 
   "What did you give him a one for?" I asked.    "He gets the numbers," was his reply.    "So why do you think he deserves a three?"    "It's the way he gets them.  He neglects pe ople; he runs over them.  He's a troublemaker." 
   "It sounds like he's totally focused on P -- on pr oduction.  And that's what he's being rewarded for.  
But what would happen if you talk ed with him about the problem, if you helped him understand the 
importance of PC?"    He said he had done so, with no effect.  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   "Then what if you set up a win-win contract with  him where you both agreed  that two-thirds of his 
compensation would come from P -- from numbers -- and the other one-thir d would come from PC -- 
how other people perceive him, what kind of leader, people builder, team builder he is?" 
   "Now that would get his attention," he replied.    So often the problem is in the system, not in th e people.  If you put good people in bad systems, 
you get bad results.  You have to water the flowers you want to grow.    As people really learn to Think Win-Win, they can set up the systems to create and reinforce it.  
They can transform unnecessarily competitive situatio ns to cooperative ones and can powerfully impact 
their effectiveness by building both P and PC.    In business, executives can align their systems to  create teams of highly productive people working 
together to compete against external standards of performance.  In education, teachers can set up 
grading systems based on an individual's performanc e in the context of agreed-upon criteria and can 
encourage students to cooperate in productive ways to  help each other learn and achieve.  In families, 
parents can shift the focus from competition with each  other to cooperation.  In activities such as 
bowling, for example, they can keep a family score and try to beat a previous one.  They can set up 
home responsibilities with Win-Win Agreements that eliminate constant nagging and enable parents to 
do the things only they can do.    A friend once shared with me  a cartoon he'd seen of two childre n talking to each other.  "If mommy 
doesn't get us up soon," one was saying, "we're go ing to be late for school."  These words brought 
forcibly to his attention the nature of the proble ms created when families are not organized on a 
responsible win-win basis.    Win-win puts the responsibility on the individu al for accomplishing specified results within clear 
guidelines and available resources.  It makes a pers on accountable to perform and evaluate the results 
and provides consequences as a natural result of  performance.  And win-win systems create the 
environment which supports and reinforces the Win-Win Agreements.  Processes     There's no way to achieve win-win ends with wi n-lose or lose-win means.  You can't say, "You're 
going to Think Win-Win, whether you like it or not." So the question becomes how to arrive at a 
win-win solution.    Roger Fisher and William Ury, two Harvard law professors, have done some outstanding work in 
what they call the "principled" approach versus th e "positional" approach to bargaining in their 
tremendously useful and insightful  book, Getting to Yes.  Although the words win-win are not used, 
the spirit and underlying philosophy of the b ook are in harmony with  the win-win approach. 
   They suggest that the essence of principled negotiation is to se parate the person from the problem, 
to focus on interests and not on positions, to invent  options for mutual gain, and to insist on objective 
criteria -- some external standard or pr inciple that both parties can buy into. 
   In my own work with various people and orga nizations seeking win-win so lutions, I suggest that 
they become involved in the following four-step proc ess: First, see the problem from the other point of 
view.  Really seek to understand and give expressi on to the needs and concerns of the other party as 
well as or better than they can themselves.  Second, id entify the key issues and concerns (not positions) 
involved.  Third, determine what results would consti tute a fully   acceptable solution.  And fourth, 
identify possible new options to achieve those results. 
   Habits 5 and 6 deal directly with two of the el ements of this process, an d we will go into those in 
depth in the next two chapters.    But at this juncture, let me point out the highly interrelated natu re of the process of win-win with 
the essence of win-win itself.  You can only achiev e win-win solutions with win-win processes -- the