T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
Part Three  
Public Victory  
 
Paradigms of Interdependence 
 
   There can be no friendship without confidence, and no confidence without integrity 
   -- Samuel Johnso 
*         *  
    Before moving into the area of Public Victory,  we should remember that effective interdependence 
can only be built on a foundation of true independ ence.  Private Victory precedes Public Victory.  
Algebra comes before calculus.    As we look back and survey the terrain to  determine where we've be en and where we are in 
relationship to where we're going, we clearly see that we could not have go tten where we are without 
coming the way we came.  There aren't any other roads;  there aren't any shortcuts.  There's no way to 
parachute into this terrain.  The landscape ahead is covered with the fragments of broken relationships 
of people who have tried.  They've tried to jump into effective relationship s without the maturity, the 
strength of character, to maintain them. 
   But you just can't do it; you simply have to travel the road.  You can't be successful with other people if you haven't paid the price of success with yourself.    A few years ago when I was giving a seminar on the Oregon coast, a man came up to me and said, 
"You know, Stephen, I really don't enjoy coming  to these seminars."  He had my attention. 
   "Look at everyone else here," he continued.  "Look at this beautiful coastline and the sea out there 
and all that's happening.  All I can do is sit and wo rry about the grilling I'm goin g to get from my wife 
tonight on the phone.    "She gives me the third degree every time I'm away.  Where did I eat breakfast?  Who else was 
there?  Was I in meetings all morning?  When did we stop for lunch?  What did I do during lunch?  
How did I spend the afternoon?  What did I do for en tertainment in the evening?  Who was with me?  
What did we talk about?    "And what she really wants to know, but never qu ite asks, is who she can call to verify everything I 
tell her.  She just nags me and questions everything I do whenever I'm away.  It's taken the bloom out 
of this whole experience.  I really don't enjoy it at all."    He did look pretty miserable.  We talked for a while, and then he  made a very interesting comment.  
"I guess she knows all the questions to ask," he said  a little sheepishly.  "It was at a seminar like this 
that I met her when I was married to someone else!"    I considered the implications of his comment and then said, "You're kind of into 'quick fix,' aren't 
you?"    "What do you mean?" he replied.    "Well, you'd like to take a screwdriver and just open up your wife's head and rewire that attitude of hers really fast, wouldn't you?"    "Sure, I'd like her to change," he  exclaimed.  "I don't think it's right for her to constantly grill me like 
she does."    "My friend," I said, "you can't talk your way out of problems you behave yourself into." 
   We're dealing with a very dramatic and very  fundamental Paradigm Shift here.  You may try to 
lubricate your social interactions with personality techniques and skills, but in the process, you may 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
truncate the vital character base.  You can't have th e fruits without the roots.  It's the principle of 
sequencing: Private Victory precedes Public Vict ory.  Self-mastery and self-discipline are the 
foundation of good relationships with others.    Some people say that you have to like yourself before you can like others.  I think that idea has merit, but if you don't know yourself, if you don' t control yourself, if you don't have mastery over 
yourself, it's very hard to like yourself, except  in some short-term, psych-up, superficial way. 
   Real self-respect comes from dominion over self , from true independence.  And that's the focus of 
Habits 1, 2, and 3.  Independence is an achievement.   Interdependence is a choice only independent 
people can make.  Unless we are willing to achieve re al independence, it's foolish to try to develop 
human-relations skills.  We might try.  We might even have some degree of success when the sun is 
shining.  But when the difficult ti mes come -- and they will -- we wo n't have the foundation to keep 
things together.    The most important ingredient we put into any relationship is not what we say or what we do, but 
what we are.  And if our words an d our actions come from superficia l human-relations techniques (the 
personality ethic) rather than from our own inner core (the character ethic), others will sense that 
duplicity.  We simply won't be able to create and sustain the foundation necessary for effective 
interdependence.    The techniques and skills that really make a diffe rence in human interaction are the ones that almost 
naturally flow from a truly independent character.  So the place to begin building any relationship is 
inside ourselves, inside our Circle of Influenc e, our own character.  As we become independent -- 
proactive, centered in correct principles, value dr iven and able to organize and execute around the 
priorities in our life with integr ity -- we then can choose to beco me interdependent -- capable of 
building rich, enduring, highly producti ve relationships with other people. 
   As we look at the terrai n ahead, we see that we're ente ring a whole new dimension.  
Interdependence opens up worlds of possibilitie s for deep, rich, meaningful associations, for 
geometrically increased productivity, for serving, for contributing, for learning, for growing.  But it is 
also where we feel the greatest pain , the greatest frustration, the grea test roadblocks to happiness and 
success.  And we're very aware of that pain because it is acute. 
   We can often live for years with the chronic pain of our lack of vision, lead ership or management in 
our personal lives.  We feel vaguely uneasy and unco mfortable and occasionally take steps to ease the 
pain, at least for a time.  But the pain is chro nic, we get used to it, we learn to live with it. 
   But when we have problems in our interactions with other people, we're very aware of acute pain -- 
it's often intense, and we want it to go away.    That's when we try to treat the symptoms with quick fixes and techniques -- the band-aids of the 
personality ethic.  We don't understand that the acute pain is an outgrowth of the deeper, chronic 
problem.  And until we stop treati ng the symptoms and start treati ng the problem, our efforts will 
only bring counterproductive results.  We will only  be successful at obscurin g the chronic pain even 
more.    Now, as we think of effective interaction with others, let's go back to our earlier definition of 
effectiveness.  We've said it's th e P/PC Balance, the fundamental conc ept in the story of the Goose and 
the Golden Egg.    In an interdependent situation, the golden e ggs are the effectiveness, the wonderful synergy, the 
results created by open communication  and positive interaction with ot hers.  And to get those eggs on 
a regular basis, we need to take care of the goose.  We need to create and care  for the relationships that 
make those results realities.    So before we descend from our point of reconna issance and get into Habits 4, 5, and 6, I would like 
to introduce what I believe to be a very powerful me taphor in describing relati onships and in defining 
the P/PC Balance in an interdependent reality. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
 
The Emotional Bank Account TM     We all know what a financial bank account is.  We make deposits into it and build up a reserve 
from which we can make withdrawals when we need to.  An Emotional Bank Account is a metaphor 
that describes the amount of trust that's been built up  in a relationship.  It's the feeling of safeness you 
have with another human being.    If I make deposits into an Emotional Bank A ccount with you through courtesy, kindness, honesty, 
and keeping my commitments to you, I build up a re serve.  Your trust toward me becomes higher, and 
I can call upon that trust many times if I need to.  I can even make mistakes and that trust level, that emotional reserve, will compensate for it.  My co mmunication may not be clear, but you'll get my 
meaning anyway.  You won't make me "an offender for a word."  When the trust account is high, 
communication is easy, instant, and effective.    But if I have a habit of showing discourtesy, disr espect, cutting you off, ov erreacting, ignoring you, 
becoming arbitrary, betraying your trust, threatening you, or play ing little tin god in your life, 
eventually my Emotional Bank Account is overdrawn.   The trust level gets very low.  Then what 
flexibility do I have?    None.  I'm walking on mine fields.  I have to be very careful of everything I say.  I measure every 
word.  It's tension city, memo heaven.  It's protecting my backside, politicking.  And many 
organizations are filled with it.  Many families are filled with it.  Many marriages are filled with it. 
   If a large reserve of trust is  not sustained by continuing depo sits, a marriage will deteriorate.  
Instead of rich, spontaneous understanding an d communication, the situation becomes one of 
accommodation, where two people simply attempt to li ve independent life-styles in a fairly respectful 
and tolerant way.  The relationship may further dete riorate to one of hostility and defensiveness.  The 
"fight or flight" response creates verbal battles, slammed doors, refusal to talk, emotional withdrawal 
and self-pity.  It may end up in a cold war at home, sustained only by children, sex, and social pressure, 
or image protection.  Or it may en d up in open warfare in the courts , where bitter ego-decimating legal 
battles can be carried on for years as people endlessly confess the sins of a former spouse. 
   And this is in the most intimate, the most potentially rich, joyful, satisfying and productive 
relationship possible between two pe ople on this earth.  The P/PC lig hthouse is there; we can either 
break ourselves against it or we can use it as a guiding light.    Our most constant relationships, like marriage, require our most constant deposits.  With continuing expectations, old deposits evaporate.  If  you suddenly run into an old high school friend 
you haven't seen for years, you can pick up right wher e you left off because the earlier deposits are still 
there.  But your accounts with the people you inte ract with on a regular basis require more constant 
investment.  There are sometimes automatic withd rawals in your daily interactions or in their 
perception of you that you don't even  know about.  This is especially  true with teenagers in the home. 
   Suppose you have a teenage son and your normal conversation is something like, "Clean your room.  
Button your shirt.  Turn down the radio.  Go ge t a haircut.  And don't forget to take out the 
garbage!"  Over a period of time, the withdrawals far exceed the deposits.    Now, suppose this son is in the process of maki ng some important decisions that will affect the rest 
of his life.  But the trust level is so low and th e communication process so  closed, mechanical, and 
unsatisfying that he simply will not be open to  your counsel.  You may have the wisdom and the 
knowledge to help him, but because your account is so overdrawn, he will end up making his decisions 
from a short-range emotional perspective, which may well result in many negative long-range 
consequences.    You need a positive balance to communicate  on these tender issues.  What do you do? 
   What would happen if you started making depo sits into the relationship ?  Maybe the opportunity 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
comes up to do him a little kindness -- to bring home a magazine on skateboarding, if that's his interest, 
or just to walk up to him when he's working on a project and offer help.  Perhaps you could invite him 
to go to a movie with you or take him out for some  ice cream.  Probably the most important deposit 
you could make would be just to listen, with out judging or preaching or reading your own 
autobiography into what he says.  Just listen and s eek to understand.  Let him feel your concern for 
him, your acceptance of him as a person.    He may not respond at first.  He may even be suspicious.  "What's Dad up to now?  What 
technique is Mom trying on me this time?"  But as  those genuine deposits keep coming, they begin to 
add up.  That overdrawn balance is shrinking.    Remember that quick fix is a mirage.  Buildin g and repairing relationsh ips takes time.  If you 
become impatient with this apparent lack of respon se of his seeming ingratitude, you may make huge 
withdrawals and undo all the good you've done.  "Aft er all we've done for you, the sacrifices we've 
made, how can you be so ungrateful?  We try to be nice and you act like this.  I can't believe it!    It's hard not to get impatient.  It takes character to  be proactive, to focus on your Circle of Influence, 
to nurture growing things, and not to "pull up the flowers to see how the roots are coming." 
   But there really is no quick fix.  Building an d repairing relationships are long-term investments. 
 Six Major Deposits     Let me suggest six major deposits that build the Emotional Bank Account    Understanding the Individual    Really seeking to understand another person is probably one of the most important deposits you can 
make, and it is the key to every other deposit.  Yo u simply don't know what constitutes a deposit to 
another person until you understand  that individual.  What might be  a deposit for you -- going for a 
walk to talk things over, going out for ice cream together, working on a common project -- might not be 
perceived by someone else as a deposit at all.  It mi ght even be perceived as a withdrawal, if it doesn't 
touch the person's deep interests or needs.    One person's mission is another person's minutia.  To make a deposit, what is important to another 
person must be as important to yo u as the other person is to you.   You may be working on a high 
priority project when your six-year-ol d child interrupts with something th at seems trivial to you, but it 
may be very important from his point of view.  It takes Habit 2 to recognize and recommit yourself to the value of that person and Ha bit 3 to subordinate your schedul e to that human priority.  By 
accepting the value he places on what he has to sa y, you show an understanding of him that makes a 
great deposit.    I have a friend whose son developed an avid inte rest in baseball.  My friend wasn't interested in 
baseball at all.  But one summer, he took his son to  see every major league team play one game.  The 
trip took over six weeks and cost a great deal of money, but it became  a powerful bonding experience in 
their relationship.    My friend was asked on his return, "Do you like baseball that much?"    "No," he replied, "but I like my son that much."    I have another friend, a college professor, who had a terrible relationship with his teenage son.  
This man's entire life was essentially academic, an d he felt his son was totally wasting his life by 
working with this hands instead of working to develop his mind.  As a result, he was almost 
constantly on the boy's back, and, in  moments of regret, he would try to  make deposits that just didn't 
work.  The boy perceived the gestur es as new forms of rejection, co mparison, and judgment, and they 
precipitated huge withdrawals.  The relationship was turning sour, and it was breaking the father's 
heart.    One day I shared with him this principle of ma king what is important to the other person as 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
important to you as the other person is to you.  He  took it deeply to heart.  He engaged his son in a 
project to build a miniature Wall of  China around their home.  It wa s a consuming project, and they 
worked side by side on it for over a year and a half.    Through that bonding experience, the son moved th rough that phase in his lif e and into an increased 
desire to develop his mind.  But the real benefit wa s what happened to the re lationship.  Instead of a 
sore spot, it became a source of joy and strength to both father and son. 
   Our tendency is to project ou t of our own autobiographies what we think other people want or need.  
We project our intentions on the be havior of others.  We interpret wh at constitutes a deposit based on 
our own needs and desires, either no w or when we were at a similar age or  stage in life.  If they don't 
interpret our effort as a deposit, ou r tendency is to take it as a rejection of our well-intentioned effort 
and give up.    The Golden Rule says to "Do unto others as yo u would have others do unto you."  While on the 
surface that could mean to do for them what you would like to have done for you, I think the more 
essential meaning is to understand them deeply as individuals, the way you would want to be 
understood, and then to treat them in terms of th at understanding.  As one successful parent said 
about raising children, "Treat them all the same by treating them differently."  Attending to the Little Things     The little kindnesses and courtesies are so import ant.  Small discourtesies, little unkindnesses, little 
forms of disrespect make large withdrawals.  In relationships, the little things are the big things. 
   I remember an evening I spent with two of my sons some years ago.  It was an organized 
father-and-son outing, complete with gymnastics, wr estling matches, hot dogs, orangeade, and a movie 
-- the works.    In the middle of the movie, Se an, who was then four years old, fe ll asleep in his seat.  His older 
brother, Stephen, who was six, stayed awake, and we watched the rest of the movie together.  When it 
was over, I picked Sean up in my arms, carried him ou t to the car and laid him in the back seat.  It was 
very cold that night, so I took off my coat  and gently arranged it over and around him. 
   When we arrived home, I quickly carried Sean in and tucked him into bed.  After Stephen put on 
his "jammies" and brushed his teeth, I lay down ne xt to him to talk about the night out together. 
   "How'd you like it, Stephen?"    "Fine," he answere"    "Did you have fun?"    " Y e s . "     "What did you like most?"    "I don't know.  The trampoline, I guess."    "That was quite a thing, wasn't it -- doing th ose somersaults and tricks in the air like that?" 
   There wasn't much response on his part.  I found myself making conver sation.  I wondered why 
Stephen wouldn't open up more.  He usually did when exciting things happened.  I was a little 
disappointed.  I sensed something was wrong; he had been so quiet on the way home and getting 
ready for bed.    Suddenly Stephen turned over on his side, facing  the wall.  I wondered why and lifted myself up 
just enough to see his eyes welling up with tears.    "What's wrong, honey?  What is it?"    He turned back, and I could sense he was feeling some embarrassment for the tears and his 
quivering lips and chin    "Daddy, if I were cold, would you put your coat around me too?"    Of all the events of that special night out toge ther, the most important was a little act of kindness -- a 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
momentary, unconscious showing of love to his little brother. 
   What a powerful, personal lesson that experience was to me then and is even now.  People are very 
tender, very sensitive inside.  I don't believe age or  experience makes much difference.  Inside, even 
within the most toughened and calloused exteriors, are the tender feelings and emotions of the heart. 
 Keeping Commitments     Keeping a commitment or a promise is a major depo sit; breaking one is a ma jor withdrawal.  In fact, 
there's probably not a more massive withdrawal than  to make a promise that's important to someone 
and then not to come through.  The next time a prom ise is made, they won't believe it.  People tend to 
build their hopes around promises, particularly promises about their basic livelihood.    I've tried to adopt a philosophy as a parent neve r to make a promise I don't keep.  I therefore try to 
make them very carefully, very sparingly, and to be  aware of as many variables and contingencies as 
possible so that something doesn't suddenly come up to keep me from fulfilling it. 
   Occasionally, despite all my effort, the unexpe cted does come up, creating a situation where it 
would be unwise or impossible to keep a promise I've made.  But I value that promise.  I either keep it 
anyway, or explain the situation thoroughly to the person involved and ask to be released from the 
promise.    I believe that if you cultivate the habit of al ways keeping the promises you make, you build bridges 
of trust that span the gaps of understanding bet ween you and your child.  Then, when your child 
wants to do something you don't want him to do, and out of your maturity you can see consequences that the child cannot see, you can say, "Son, if you do this, I promise you that this will be the result."  If 
that child has cultivated trust in your word, in  your promises, he will act on your counsel. 
 Clarifying Expectations     Imagine the difficulty you might encounter if you and your boss had different assumptions 
regarding whose role it was to create your job description.    "When am I going to get my job description?" you might ask. 
   "I've been waiting for you to bring one to me so that we could discuss it," your boss might reply. 
   "I thought defining my job was your role."    "That's not my role at all.  Don't you remember?  Right from the first, I said that how you do in the 
job largely depends on you."    "I thought you meant that the quality of my jo b depended on me.  But I don't even know what my 
job really is."    "I did exactly what you asked me to do and here is the report."    "I don't want a report.  The goals was to solve the problem -- not to analyze it and report on it." 
   "I thought the goal was to get a handle on th e problem so we could delegate it to someone else." 
   How many times have we had these kinds of conversations?    "You said..."    "No, you're wrong! I said..."    "You did not! You never said I was supposed to..."    "Oh, yes I did! I clearly said..."    "You never even mentioned..."    "But that was our agreement..."    The cause of almost all relationship difficulties is rooted in conflicting or ambiguous expectations 
around roles and goals.  Whether we are dealing with  the question of who does what at work, how 
you communicate with your daughter  when you tell her to clean her room, or who feeds the fish and 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
takes out the garbage, we can be certain that unclear expectations will lead to misunderstanding, 
disappointment, and withdrawals of trust.    Many expectations are implicit.  They haven't been explicitly stated or announced, but people nevertheless bring them to a particular situation.  In marriage, for example, a man and a woman have implicit expectations of each othe r in their marriage roles.  Although  these expectations have not been 
discussed, or sometimes even recognized by the person who has them, fulfilling them makes great 
deposits in the relationship and violating them makes withdrawals. 
   That's why it's so important wh enever you  come into a new situation to get all the expectations out 
on the table.  People will begin to judge each other through those expectations.  And if they feel like 
their basic expectations have been violated, the re serve of trust is diminished.  We create many 
negative situations by simply assuming that our expe ctations are self-evident and that they are clearly 
understood and shared by other people.    The deposit is to make the expectations clear and explicit in the beginning.  This takes a real 
investment of time and effort up front, but it save s great amounts of time and effort down the road.  
When expectations are not clear and shared, people begin to become emotionally involved and simple 
misunderstandings become compounded, turning into personality clashes and communication 
breakdowns.    Clarifying expectations sometimes takes a great deal  of courage.  It seems easier to act as though 
differences don't exist and to hope things will work out than it is to face the differences and work 
together to arrive at a mutually agreeable set of expectations.  Showing Personal Integrity     Personal integrity generates trust and is th e basis of many different kinds of deposits. 
   Lack of integrity can undermine almost any othe r effort to create high trust accounts.  People can 
seek to understand, remember the little things, keep  their promises, clarify and fulfill expectations, and 
still fail to build reserves of trust if they are inwardly duplicitous. 
   Integrity includes but goes beyond honesty.   Honesty is telling the truth -- in other words, 
conforming our words to reality.  Integrity is co nforming reality to our words -- in other words, 
keeping promises and fulfilling expectations.  This  requires an integrated character, a oneness, 
primarily with self but also with life.    One of the most important ways to manifest integr ity is to be loyal to those who are not present.  In 
doing so, we build the trust of th ose who are present.  When you defend those who are absent, you 
retain the trust of those present.    Suppose you and I were talking alone, and we we re criticizing our supervisor in a way that we 
would not dare to if he were presen t.  Now what will happen when yo u and I have a falling out?  You 
know I'm going to be discussing your weaknesses with someone else.  That 's what you and I did 
behind our supervisor's back.  You know my nature .  I'll sweet-talk you to your face and bad-mouth 
you behind your back.  You've seen me do it.    That's the essence of duplicity.  Does that build a reserve of trust in my account with you. 
   On the other hand, suppose you were to start cr iticizing our supervisor and I basically told you I 
agree with the content of some of the criticism and suggest that the two of us go directly to him and 
make an effective presentation of how things might be improved .  Then what would you know I 
would do if someone were to criticize you to me behind your back?    For another example, suppose in my effort to build a relationship with you, I told you something 
someone else had shared with me in confidence.  "I really shouldn't tell you this,"  I might say, "but 
since you're my friend..."  Would my betraying anothe r person build my trust account with you?  Or 
would you wonder if the things you had told me  in confidence were being shared with others? 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Such duplicity might appear to be making a depo sit with the person you're wi th, but it is actually a 
withdrawal because you communicat e your own lack of integrity.  You may get the golden egg of 
temporary pleasure from putting someone down or sharing privileged information, but you're 
strangling the goose, weakening the relationship th at provides enduring pleasure in association. 
   Integrity in an interdependent reality is simply th is: you treat everyone by the same set of principles.  
As you do, people will come to trust you.  They ma y not at first appreciate the honest confrontational 
experiences such integrity might generate.  Conf rontation takes considerable courage, and many 
people would prefer to take the course of leas t resistance, belittling an d criticizing, betraying 
confidences, or participating in go ssip about others behind their backs.  But in the long run, people 
will trust and respect you if you are honest and op en and kind with them.  You care enough to 
confront.  And to be trusted, it is said, is greater than  to be loved.  In the long run, I am convinced, to 
be trusted will be also mean to be loved.    When my son Joshua was quite young, he woul d frequently ask me a soul-searching question.  
Whenever I overreacted to someone else or was the le ast bit impatient or unkind, he was so vulnerable 
and so honest and our relationship was so good that he would simply look me in the eye and say, "Dad, 
do you love me?"  If he thought I was breaking a basic principle of life toward someone else, he wondered if I wouldn't break it with him.    As a teacher, as well as a parent, I have found th at the key to the ninety-nin e is the one -- particularly 
the one that is testing the patience and the good humo r of the many.  It is the love and the discipline of 
the one student, the one child, that communicates love  for the others.  It's how you treat the one that 
reveals how you regard the ninety-nine, be cause everyone is ultimately a one. 
   Integrity also means avoiding any communication  that is deceptive, full of guile, or beneath the 
dignity of people.  "A lie is any communication with intent to deceive," according to one definition of 
the word.  Whether we communicate with words or be havior, if we have integrity, our intent cannot 
be to deceive.  Apologizing Sincerely When  You Make a Withdrawal 
    When we make withdrawals fr om the Emotional Bank Account, we need to apologize and we need 
to do it sincerely.  Great deposits come in the sincere words    "I was wrong."    "That was unkind of me."    "I showed you no respect."    "I gave you no dignity, and I'm deeply sorry."    "I embarrassed you in front of your friends and I had no call to do that.  Even though I wanted to 
make a point, I never should have done it.  I apologize."    It takes a great deal of character strength to ap ologize quickly out of one' s heart rather than out of 
pity.  A person must possess himself and have a de ep sense of security in fun damental principles and 
values in order to genuinely apologize.    People with little internal security can't do it.  It makes them too vulnerable.  They feel it makes 
them appear soft and weak, and they fear that othe rs will take advantage of their weakness.  Their 
security is based on the opinions of  other people, and they worry abou t what others might think.  In 
addition, they usually feel justified in what they di d.  They rationalize their own wrong in the name of 
the other person's wrong, and if they apologize at all, it's superficial.    "If you're going to bow, bow low," say Eastern wisdom.  "Pay the uttermost farthing," says the 
Christian ethic.  To be a deposit, an apology must be sincere.  And it must be perceived as sincere. 
   Leo Roskin taught, "It is the weak who are cruel.   Gentleness can only be expected from the strong. 
 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   I was in my office at home one afternoon writing,  of all things, on the subj ect of patience.  I could 
hear the boys running up and down the hall making  loud banging noises, and I could feel my own 
patience beginning to wane.    Suddenly, my son David started pounding on the bathroom door, yelling at the top of his lungs, "Let 
me in! Let me in!"    I rushed out of the office and spoke to him with great intensity.  "David, do you have any idea how 
disturbing that is to me?  Do you know how hard it  is to try to concentrate and write creatively?  Now 
you go into your room and stay in  there until you can behave yourself."  So in he went, dejected, and 
shut the door.    As I turned around, I became aware of another problem.  The boys had been playing tackle football 
in the four-foot-wide hallway, and on e of them had been elbowed in th e mouth.  He was lying there in 
the hall, bleeding from the mouth.  David, I discove red, had gone to the bathroom to get a wet towel 
for him.  But his sister, Maria, who was ta king a shower, wouldn't open the door. 
   When I realized that I ha d completely misinterpreted the situation and had overreacted, I 
immediately went in to apologize to David.    As I opened the door, the first thing he said to me was, "I won't forgive you."    "Well, why not, honey?" I replied.  "Honestly, I didn't realize you were trying to help your brother.  
Why won't you forgive me?"    "Because you did the same thing last week," he replied.  In other words, he was saying.  "Dad, 
you're overdrawn, and you're not going to talk your way out of a problem you behaved yourself into." 
   Sincere apologies make deposits; repeated apol ogies interpreted as insincere make withdrawals.  
And the quality of the relationship reflects it.    It is one thing to make a mistake, and quit e another thing not to admit it.  People will forgive 
mistakes, because mistakes are usually of the mind, mistakes of judgment.  Bu t people will not easily 
forgive the mistakes of the heart, the ill intention, th e bad motives, the prideful justifying cover-up of 
the first mistake.  The Laws of Love and the Laws of Life     When we make deposits of unconditional love, when we live the primary laws of love, we 
encourage others to live the primary  laws of life.  In other words, when we truly love others without 
condition, without strings, we help them feel secu re and safe and validated and affirmed in their 
essential worth, identity, and integrity.  Their na tural growth process is encouraged.  We make it 
easier for them to live the laws of life -- cooperatio n, contribution, self-discipline, integrity -- and to 
discover and live true to the highest and best within them.  We give them the freedom to act on their 
own inner imperatives rather than react to our cond itions and limitations.  This does not mean we 
become permissive or soft.  That itself is a massi ve withdrawal.  We counsel, we plead, we set limits 
and consequences.  But we love, regardless.    When we violate the primary laws of love -- when we attach strings and condit ions to that gift -- we 
actually encourage others to violate the primary laws  of life.  We put them in a reactive, defensive 
position where they feel they have to prove "I matter as a person, independent of you."    In reality, they aren't independent.  They  are counter-dependent, wh ich is another form of 
dependency and is at the lowest end of the Matu rity Continuum.  They become reactive, almost 
enemy-centered, more concerned about defending th eir "rights" and producing evidence of their 
individuality than they are about proactively liste ning to and honoring th eir own inner imperatives. 
   Rebellion is a knot of the heart, not of the mind.  The key is to make deposits -- constant deposits of 
unconditional love.  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   I once had a friend who was dean of a very pr estigious school.  He planned and saved for years to 
provide his son the opportunity to attend that instit ution, but when the time came, the boy refused to 
go.    This deeply concerned his father.  Graduating from that particular school would have been a great 
asset to the boy.  Besides, it was a family tradition.   Three generations of attendance preceded the boy.  
The father pleaded and urged and talked.  He also trie d to listen to the boy to understand him, all the 
while hoping that the so n would change his mind. 
   The subtle message being communicated was one of  conditional love.  The son felt that in a sense 
the father's desire for him to atte nd the school outweighed the value he placed on him as a person and 
as a son, which was terribly threatening.  Conseque ntly, he fought for and with his own identity and 
integrity, and he increased his resolve and his efforts to rationalize his decision not to go. 
   After some intense soul-searching, the father de cided to make a sacrifice -- to renounce conditional 
love.  He knew that his son might choose differently than he had wished; nevertheless, he and his wife 
resolved to love their son unconditionally, regardless of his choice.  It was an extremely difficult thing 
to do because the value of his educational experien ce was so close to their hearts and because it was 
something they had planned and worked for since his birth. 
   The father and mother went th rough a very difficult rescriptin g process, struggling to really 
understand the nature of unconditional love.  Th ey communicated to the boy what they were doing 
and why, and told him that they had come to the po int at which they could sa y in all honesty that his 
decision would not affect their complete feeling of un conditional love toward him.  They didn't do this 
to manipulate him, to try to get him to "shape up."  They did it as the logical extension of their growth 
and character.    The boy didn't give much of  a response at the time, but his parents had such a paradigm of 
unconditional love at that point that it would have made no difference in their feelings for him.  About 
a week later, he told his parents th at he had decided not to go.  They were perfectly prepared for his 
response and continued to show unconditional lo ve for him.  Everything was settled and life went 
along normally.    A short time later, an interesting thing happened.  Now that the boy no longer felt he had to defend 
his position, he searched within himself more deeply and found that he really did want to have this 
educational experience.  He applied for admission, and then he told his fa ther, who again showed 
unconditional love by fully accepting his son's deci sion.  My friend was happy, but not excessively so, 
because he had truly learned to love without condition.    Dag Hammarskjold, past Secretary-General of  the United Nations, once made a profound, 
far-reaching statement:  "It is more noble to give yourself completely to one individual than to labor 
diligently for the salvation of the masses."    I take that to mean that I could devote eight, te n, or twelve hours a day, five, six, or seven days a 
week to the thousands of people and projects "o ut there" and still not have a deep, meaningful 
relationship with my own spouse, with my own teen age son, with my closest working associate.  And 
it would take more nobility of character -- more hum ility, courage, and strength -- to rebuild that one 
relationship than it would to continue putting in  all those hours for all those people and causes. 
   In 25 years of consulting with organizations, I have been impressed over and over again by the 
power of that statement.  Many of the problems in organizations stem from relationship difficulties at 
the very top -- between two partners in a comp any, between the president and an executive 
vice-president.  It truly takes more nobility of charac ter to confront and resolve those issues than it 
does to continue to diligently work for the many projects and people "out there." 
   When I first came across Hammarskjold's statem ent, I was working in an organization where there 
were unclear expectations between the individual wh o was my right-hand man and myself.  I simply 
did not have the courage to confro nt our differences regarding role and goal expectations and values, 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
particularly in our methods of administration.  So I worked for a number of months in a compromise 
mode to avoid what might turn out to be an ugly  confrontation.  All the while, bad feelings were 
developing inside both of us.    After reading that it is more noble to give yo urself completely to one individual than to labor 
diligently for the salvation of the masses, I was d eeply affected by the idea of rebuilding that 
relationship.    I had to steel myself for what lay ahead, because I knew it would be hard to really get the issues out 
and to achieve a deep, common understanding and commitment.  I remember actually shaking in 
anticipation of the visit.  He seemed like such a h ard man, so set in his own ways and so right in his 
own eyes; yet I needed his strengths and abilities.  I was afraid a confrontation might jeopardize the 
relationship and result in my losing those strengths.    I went through a mental dress rehearsal of the an ticipated visit, and I finally became settled within 
myself around the principles rather than  the practices of what I was going to do and say.  At last I felt 
peace of mind and the courag e to have the communication. 
   When we met together, to my total surprise, I di scovered that this man had been going through the 
very same process and had been longing for such  a conversation.  He was anything but hard and 
defensive.    Nevertheless, our administrative styles were co nsiderably different, and th e entire organization was 
responding to these differences.  We both acknowle dged the problems that our disunity had created.  
Over several visits, we were able to confront the deeper  issues, to get them all out on the table, and to 
resolve them, one by one, with a spirit of high mu tual respect.  We were able to develop a powerful 
complementary team and a deep personal affection which added tremendously to our ability to work 
effectively together.    Creating the unity necessary to run an effectiv e business or a family or a marriage requires great 
personal strength and courage.  No amount of tec hnical administrative skill in laboring for the masses 
can make up for lack of nobility of personal characte r in developing relationships.  It is at a very 
essential, one-on-one level, that we liv e the primary laws of love and life. 
 P Problems are PC Opportunities     This experience also taught me another powerful  paradigm of interdependence.  It deals with the 
way in which we see problems.  I had lived for months  t r y i n g  t o  a v o i d  t h e  p r o b l e m ,  s e e i n g  i t  a s  a  
source of irritation, a stumbling block, and wishing it  would somehow go away.  But, as it turned out, 
the very problem created the opportunity to build a deep relationship that empowered us to work 
together as a strong complementary team.    I suggest that in an interdependent situation,  every P problem is a PC o pportunity -- a chance to 
build the Emotional Bank Accounts that sign ificantly affect interdependent production. 
   When parents see their children's problems as op portunities to build the relationship instead of as 
negative, burdensome irritations, it totally changes the nature of  parent-child interaction.  Parents 
become more willing, even excited, about deeply understanding and helping their children.  When a 
child comes to them with a problem, instead of  thinking, "Oh, no! Not another problem!" their 
paradigm is, "Here is a great opportunity for me to  really help my child and to invest in our 
relationship."  Many interactions change from tran sactional to transformation al, and strong bonds of 
love and trust are created as children sense the valu e parents give to their problems and to them as 
individuals.    This paradigm is powerful in business as well.  One department store chain that operates from this 
paradigm has created a great loyalty among its custom ers.  Any time a customer comes into the store 
with a problem, not matter how small, the clerks i mmediately see it as an opportunity to build the