T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
Part Four -- RENEWAL 
 
Habit 7:  Sharpen the Saw TM 
 
Principles of Balanced Self-Renewal     Sometimes when I consider what tremendous  consequences come from  little things....  I am 
tempted to think...there are no little things. 
   -- Bruce Barton 
*         *  
    Suppose you were to come upon someone in th e woods working feverishly to saw down a tree. 
   "What are you doing?" you ask.    "Can't you see?" comes the impatient reply.  "I'm sawing down this tree." 
   "You look exhausted!" you exclaim.  "How long have you been at it?"    "Over five hours," he returns, "and I'm beat!  This is hard work."    "Well, why don't you take a break for a few minu tes and sharpen the saw?" you inquire.  "I'm sure 
it would go a lot faster."    "I don't have time to sharpen the saw," the man says emphatically.  "I'm too busy sawing!" 
   Habit 7 is taking time to Sharpen the Saw.  It surrounds the other habits on the Seven Habits 
paradigm because it is the habit th at makes all the others possible. 
 Four Dimensions of Renewal     Habit 7 is personal PC.  It's preserving and e nhancing the greatest asset you have -- you.  It's 
renewing the four dimensions of your nature -- physical, spiritual, mental, and social/emotional. 
   Although different words are used, most philosophie s of life deal either explic itly or implicitly with 
these four dimensions.  Philosopher Herb Shepherd  describes the healthy balanced life around four 
values: perspective (spiritual), autonomy (mental), co nnectedness (social), and tone (physical).  George 
Sheehan, the running guru, describes four roles: be ing a good animal (physi cal), a good craftsman 
(mental), a good friend (social), and a saint (spiri tual).  Sound motivation and organization theory 
embrace these four dimensions or motivations -- the economic (physical); how people are treated 
(social); how people are developed and used (mental) ; and the service, the job, the contribution the 
organization gives (spiritual).    "Sharpen the Saw" basically me ans expressing all four motivations.   It means exercising all four 
dimensions of our nature, regularly and co nsistently, in wise and balanced ways. 
   To do this, we must be proactive.  Taking time to sharpen the saw is a definite Quadrant II activity, 
and Quadrant II must be acted on.  Quadrant I, because of its urgency, acts on us; it presses upon us 
constantly.  Personal PC must be pressed upon until it becomes second nature, until it becomes a kind 
of healthy addiction.  Because it's at  the center of our Circle of Influence, no one else can do it for us.  
We must do it for ourselves.    This is the single most powerful investment we can ever make in life -- investment in ourselves, in 
the only instrument we have with wh ich to deal with life and to contribute.  We are the instruments of 
our own performance, and to be effective, we need to  recognize the importance of taking time regularly 
to sharpen the saw in all four ways.  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
 
The Physical Dimension     The physical dimension involves caring effectivel y for our physical body -- eating the right kinds of 
foods, getting sufficient rest and relaxati on, and exercising on a regular basis. 
   Exercise is one of those Quadrant II, high-leverag e activities that most of us don't do consistently 
because it isn't urgent.  And because we don't do it, sooner or later we find ourselves in Quadrant I, 
dealing with the health problems and crises th at come as a natural result of our neglect. 
   Most of us think we don't have enough time to  exercise.  What a distorted paradigm! We don't have 
time not to.  We're talking about three to six hour s a week -- or a minimum of thirty minutes a day, 
every other day.  That hardly seems an inordinate amount of time considering the tremendous benefits 
in terms of the impact on the other 162-165 hours of the week.    And you don't need any special equipment to do it .  If you want to go to a gym or a spa to use the 
equipment or enjoy some skill sports such as tennis or  racquetball, that's an added opportunity.  But it 
isn't necessary to sharpen the saw.    A good exercise program is one that you can do in your own home and one that will build your 
body in three areas: endurance, flexibility, and strength.    Endurance comes from aerobic exercise, from card iovascular efficiency -- the ability of your heart to 
pump blood through your body.    Although the heart is a muscle, it cannot be exer cised directly.  It can only  be exercised through the 
large muscle groups, particularly the leg muscles.  That's why exercises like rapid walking, running, 
biking, swimming, cross-country skiin g, and jogging are so beneficial. 
   You are considered minimally fit if you can incr ease your heart rate to at least 100 beats per minute 
and keep it at that level for 30 minutes.    Ideally you should try to raise your heart rate to  at least 60 percent of your maximum pulse rate, the 
top speed your heart can beat and still pump blood through your body.  Your maximum heart rate is generally accepted to be 220 less your age.  So, if  you are 40, you should aim for an exercise heart rate 
of 108 (220 - 40 = 180 x .6 = 108).  The "training effect" is generally considered to be between 72 and 87 
percent of your personal maximum rate.    Flexibility comes through stretching.  Most experts recommend warming up before and cooling 
down/stretching after aerobic exercise.  Before, it helps loosen and warm the muscles to prepare for 
more vigorous exercise.  After, it helps to dissipate th e lactic acid so that you don't feel sore and stiff. 
   Strength comes from muscle resistance exercises -- like simple calisthenics,  push-ups, and sit-ups, 
and from working with weights.  How much emphas is you put on developing strength depends on 
your situation.  If you're involved in physical la bor or athletic activities, increased strength will 
improve your skill.  If you have a basically sedentary  job and success in your life-style does not require 
a lot of strength, a little toning through calisthenics in  addition to your aerobic and stretching exercises 
might be sufficient.    I was in a gym one time with a friend of mine who has a Ph. D. in exercise physiology.  He was focusing on building strength.  He asked me to "s pot" him while he did some bench presses and told 
me at a certain point he'd ask me to take the weight.  "But don't take it until I tell you," he said firmly. 
   So I watched and waited and prepared to take  the weight.  The weight went up and down, up and 
down.  And I could see it begin to get harder.  But he  kept going.  He would start to push it up and 
I'd think, "There's no way he's going to make it." But he'd make it.  Then he'd slowly bring it back 
down and start back up again.   Up and down, up and down. 
   Finally, as I looked at his face, straining with the effort, his blood vessels practically jumping out of 
his skin, I thought, "This is going to fall and colla pse his chest.  Maybe I should take the weight.  
Maybe he's lost control and he does n't even know what he's doing." Bu t he'd get it safely down.  Then 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
he'd start back up again.  I couldn't believe it" 
   "Almost all the benefit of the exercise comes at th e very end, Stephen," he replied.  "I'm trying to 
build strength.  And that doesn't happen until the muscle fiber ruptures and the nerve fiber registers 
the pain.  Then nature overcompensates and with in 48 hours, the fiber is made stronger." 
   I could see his point.  It's the same principle that works with emotional muscles as well, such as 
patience.  When you exercise your patience beyond  your past limits, the emotional fiber is broken, 
nature overcompensates, and next time the fiber is stronger.    Now my friend wanted to build muscular strength .  And he knew how to do it.  But not all of us 
need to develop that kind of strength to be ef fective.  "No pain, no gain" has validity in some 
circumstances, but it is not the essence of an effective exercise program.    The essence of renewing the physical dimension is  to sharpen the saw, to exercise our bodies on a 
regular basis in a way that will preserve and e nhance our capacity to work and adapt and enjoy. 
   And we need to be wise in developing an exer cise program.  There's a te ndency, especially if you 
haven't been exercising at all, to overdo.  And that can create unnecessary  pain, injury, and even 
permanent damage.  It's best to start slowly.  An y exercise program should be in harmony with the 
latest research findings, with your doctor's re commendations and with your own self-awareness. 
   If you haven't been exercising, your body will undoubtedly protest this change in its comfortable 
downhill direction.  You won't like it at first.  Y o u  m a y  e v e n  h a t e  i t .   B u t  b e  p r o a c t i v e .   D o  i t  
anyway.  Even if it's raining on the morning you've scheduled to jog, do it anyway.  "Oh good! It's 
raining! I get to develop my willpower as well as my body!"    You're not dealing with quick fix; you're de aling with a Quadrant II activity that will bring 
phenomenal long-term results.  Ask anyone who has do ne it consistently.  Little by little, your resting 
pulse rate will go down as your heart and oxygen proc essing system becomes more efficient.  As you 
increase your body's ability to do more demanding th ings, you'll find your normal activities much more 
comfortable and pleasant.  You'll have more afternoon  energy, and the fatigue you've felt that's made 
you "too tired" to exercise in the past will be replac ed by an energy that will invigorate everything you 
do.    Probably the greatest benefit you will experience  from exercising will be the development of your 
Habit 1 muscles of proactivity.  As you act base d on the value of physical well-being instead of 
reacting to all the forces that keep you from exer cising, your paradigm of yourself, your self-esteem, 
your self-confidence, and your integrity will be profoundly affected.  The Spiritual Dimension     Renewing the spiritual dimension provides leadersh ip to your life.  It's highly related to Habit 2. 
   The spiritual dimension is your core, your cent er, your commitment to your value system.  It's a 
very private area of life and a supremely important on e.  It draws upon the sources that inspire and 
uplift you and tie you to the timeless truths of all hu manity.  And people do it very, very differently. 
   I find renewal in daily prayerful meditation on the scriptures because they represent my value 
system.  As I read and meditate, I feel renewed, strengthened, centered, and recommitted to serve. 
   Immersion in great literature or great music can provide a similar renewal of the spirit for some.  
There are others who find it in the way they communicate with na ture.  Nature bequeaths its own 
blessing on those who immerse themselves in it.  When you're able to leave the noise and the discord 
of the city and give yourself up to the harmony an d rhythm of nature, you co me back renewed.  For a 
time, you're undisturbable, almost unflappable, unt il gradually the noise and the discord from outside 
start to invade that sense of inner peace.    Arthur Gordon shares a wonderful, intimate story of his own spiritual renewal in a little story called 
"The Turn of the Tide." It tells of a time in his lif e when he began to feel that everything was stale and 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
flat.  His enthusiasm waned; his writing efforts wer e fruitless.  And the situation was growing worse 
day by day.    Finally, he determined to get help from a medical doctor.  Observ ing nothing physically wrong, the 
doctor asked him if he would be able to follow his instructions for one day.    When Gordon replied that he could, the doctor  told him to spend the following day in the place 
where he was happiest as a child.  He could take food , but he was not to talk to anyone or to read or 
write or listen to the radio.  He then wrote out four  prescriptions and told him to open one at nine, 
twelve, three, and six o'clock.    "Are you serious?" Gordon asked him.    "You won't think I'm joking when you get my bill!" was the reply.    So the next morning, Gordon went to the beach.   As he opened the firs t prescription, he read 
"Listen carefully." He thought the doctor was insane.  How could he listen for three hours? But he had 
a
greed to follow the doctor's orders, so he listened.  He heard the usual sounds of the sea and the birds.  
After a while, he could hear the other sounds that weren't  so apparent at first.  As he listened, he began 
to think of lessons the sea had taught him as a child -- patience, respec t, an awareness of the 
interdependence of things.  He bega n to listen to the sounds -- and th e silence -- and to feel a growing 
peace.    At noon, he opened the second slip of paper and read "Try reaching back." "Reaching back to what?" 
he wondered.  Perhaps to childhood, perhaps to memo ries of happy times.  He thought about his past, 
about the many little moments of joy.  He trie d to remember them with exactness.  And in 
remembering, he found a growing warmth inside.    At three o'clock, he opened the third piece of paper.  Until now, the prescr iptions had been easy to 
take.  But this one was different; it said "Examine  your motives." At first he was defensive.  He 
thought about what he wanted -- success, recognition,  security, and he justified them all.  But then the 
thought occurred to him that thos e motives weren't good enough, an d that perhaps therein was the 
answer to his stagnant situation.    He considered his motives deeply.  He thought about past happiness.  And at last, the answer came to him.    "In a flash of certainty," he wr ote, "I saw that if one's motives are  wrong, nothing can be right.  It 
makes no difference whether you are a mailman, a ha irdresser, an insurance salesman, a housewife -- 
whatever.  As long as you feel you are serving ot hers, you do the job well.  When you are concerned 
only with helping yourself, you do it less well -- a law as inexorable as gravity."    When six o'clock came, the final prescription didn 't take long to fill.  "Write your worries on the 
sand," it said.  He knelt and wrote several words wi th a piece of broken she ll; then he turned and 
walked away.  He didn't look back ; he knew the tide would come in. 
   Spiritual renewal takes an investment of time.  But it's a Quadrant II acti vity we don't really have 
time to neglect.    The great reformer Martin Luther is quoted as sayi ng, "I have so much to do  today, I'll need to spend 
another hour on my knees." To him, prayer was not a mechanical duty but rather a source of power in 
releasing and multiplying his energies.    Someone once inquired of a Far Eastern Zen master, who had a great serenity and peace about him 
no matter what pressures he faced, "How do you main tain that serenity and peac e?" He replied, "I never 
leave my place of meditation." He meditated early in the morning and for the rest of the day, he carried 
the peace of those moments with  him in his mind and heart. 
   The idea is that when we take time to draw on  the leadership center of our lives, what life is 
ultimately all about, it spreads like an umbrella ov er everything else.  It renews us, it refreshes us, 
particularly if we recommit to it.    This is why I believe a personal mission st atement is so important.  If we have a deep 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
understanding of our center and our purpose, we ca n review and recommit to it frequently.  In our 
daily spiritual renewal, we can visualize and "live ou t" the events of the day in harmony with those 
values.    Religious leader David O. McKay taught, "The gr eatest battles of life are fought out daily in the 
silent chambers of the soul." If you win the battles th ere, if you settle the issues that inwardly conflict, 
you feel a sense of peace, a sense of knowing what  you're about.  And you'll find that the Public 
Victories -- where you tend to think cooperatively, to promote the welfare and good of other people, 
and to be genuinely happy for other pe ople's successes -- will follow naturally. 
 The Mental Dimension     Most of our mental development and study di scipline comes through form al education.  But as 
soon as we leave the external discipline of school, many  of us let our minds atrophy.  We don't do any 
more serious reading, we don't explore new subjects  in any real depth outside our action fields, we 
don't think analytically, we don't write -- at least no t critically or in a way that tests our ability to 
express ourselves in distilled, clear, and concise language.  Instead, we spend our time watching TV.    Continuing surveys indicate that television is on  in most homes some 35 to 45 hours a week.  That's 
as much time as many people put into their jobs, more than most put into school.  It's the most 
powerful socializing influence there is.  And when we watch, we're su bject to all the values that are 
being taught through it.  That can powerfully infl uence us in very subtle and imperceptible ways. 
   Wisdom in watching television requires the e ffective self-management of Habit 3, which enables you 
to discriminate and to select the in forming, inspiring, and entertaining programs which best serve and 
express your purpose and values.    In our family, we limit television watching to around seven hours a week, an average of about an 
hour a day.  We had a family coun cil at which we talked about it and looked at some of the data 
regarding what's happening in homes because of television.  We found th at by discussing it as a family 
when no one was defensive or argumentative, people  started to realize the dependent sickness of 
becoming addicted to soap operas or to  a steady diet of a particular program. 
   I'm grateful for television and for the many high-quality educat ional and entertainment programs.  
They can enrich our lives and contri bute meaningfully to our purposes  and goals.  But there are many 
programs that simply waste our time and minds and many  that influence us in ne gative ways if we let 
them.  Like the body, television is a good servant bu t a poor master.  We need to practice Habit 3 and 
manage ourselves effectively to maximize the use of any resource in accomplishing our missions. 
   Education -- continuing education, continually honing and expanding the mind -- is vital mental renewal.  Sometimes that involves the external discipline of the classroom or systematized study 
programs; more often it does not.  Proactive pe ople can figure out many, many ways to educate 
themselves.    It is extremely valuable to train the mind to stand apart and examine its ow n program.  That, to me, 
is the definition of a liberal education -- the ab ility to examine the programs of life against larger 
questions and purposes and other  paradigms.  Trai ning, without such education, narrows and closes 
the mind so that the assumptions underlying the tr aining are never examined.  That's why it is so 
valuable to read broadly and to expose yourself to great minds.    There's no better way to inform and expand your mind on a regular basis than to get into the habit 
of reading good literature.  That's another high-l everage Quadrant II activity.  You can get into the 
best minds that are now or that have ever been in the world.  I highly recommend starting with a goal 
of a book a month then a book every two weeks, then  a book a week.  "The person who doesn't read is 
no better off than the person who can't read."  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Quality literature, such as the Great Books,  the Harvard Classics, autobiographies, National 
Geographic and other publications that expand our cu ltural awareness, and current literature in various 
fields can expand our paradigms and sharpen our ment al saw, particularly if we practice Habit 5 as we 
read and seek first to understand.  If we use our own autobiography to make early judgments before 
we really understand what an author has to say,  we limit the benefits of the reading experience. 
   Writing is another powerful way to sharpen the mental saw.  Keeping a journal of our thoughts, 
experiences, insights, and learnings promotes mental  clarity, exactness, and context.  Writing good 
letters -- communicating on the deeper level of thoughts, feelings, and ideas rather than on the shallow, superficial level of events -- also  affects our ability to think clearly,  to reason accurately, and to be 
understood effectively.    Organizing and planning represent other forms of  mental renewal associated with Habits 2 and 3.  
It's beginning with the end in mind and being able me ntally to organize to accomplish that end.  It's 
exercising the visualizing, imagining power of your mind to see the end from the beginning and to see 
the entire journey, at least in principles, if not in steps.    It is said that wars are won in the general's te nt.  Sharpening the saw in th e first three dimensions -- 
the physical, the spiritual, and the mental -- is a practice I call the "Daily Private Victory." And I 
commend to you the simple practice of spending on e hour a day every day doing it -- one hour a day 
for the rest of your life.    There's no other way you coul d spend an hour that would begin to compare with the Daily Private 
Victory in terms of value and results.  It will affect  every decision, every relationship.  It will greatly 
improve the quality, the effectiveness, of every other hour of the day, including the depth and 
restfulness of your sleep.  It will build the long-term physical, spiritua l, and mental strength to enable 
you to handle difficult challenges in life.    In the words of Phillips Brooks:    Some day, in the years to come, you will be wr estling with the great temptation, or trembling under 
the great sorrow of your life.  But the real struggle is here, now.  Now it is being decided whether, in 
the day of your supreme sorrow or temptation, you shall miserably fail or gloriously conquer.  
Character cannot be made except by a steady, long continued process.  The Social/Emotional Dimension     While the physical, spiritual, and mental dimensions are closely related to Habits 1, 2, and 3 -- centered on the principles of personal vision, leadership, and management  -- the social/emotional 
dimension focuses on Habits 4, 5, and 6 -- centered on the principles of interpersonal leadership, 
empathic communication, and creative cooperation.    The social and the emotional dimensions of our liv es are tied together because our emotional life is 
primarily, but not exclusively, developed out of an d manifested in our relationships with others. 
   Renewing our social/emotional dimension does no t take time in the same sense that renewing the 
other dimensions does.  We can do it in our normal  everyday interactions with other people.  But it 
definitely requires exercise.  We may have to push ourselves because many of us have not achieved the 
level of Private Victory and the skills of Public Victor y necessary for Habits 4, 5, and 6 to come naturally 
to us in all our interactions.    Suppose that you are a key person in my lif e.  You might be my bo ss, my subordinate, my 
co-worker, my friend, my neighbor, my spouse, my child, a member of my extended family -- anyone 
with whom I want or need to interact.  Suppose we  need to communicate together, to work together, 
to discuss a jugular issue, to accomplish a purpose or  solve a problem.  But we see things differently; 
we're looking through different glasses.  You see the young lady, and I see the old woman. 
 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   So I practice Habit 4.  I come to you and I say, "I can see that we're approaching this situation 
differently.  Why don't we agree to communicate until we can find a solution we bo th feel good about.  
Would you be willing to do that?" Most peop le would be willing to say "yes" to that. 
   Then I move to Habit 5.  "Let me listen to you firs t." Instead of listening with intent to reply, I listen 
empathically in order to deeply, thoroughly understand your parad igm.  When I can explain your 
point of view as well as you can, then I focus on communicating my point of view to you so that you 
can understand it as well.    Based on the commitment to search for a solu tion that we both feel good about and a deep 
understanding of each other's points of view, we move  to Habit 6.  We work together to produce Third 
Alternative solutions to our differences that we both recognize are better than th e ones either you or I 
proposed initially.    Success in Habits 4, 5, and 6 is not primarily a matte r of intellect; it's primarily a matter of emotion.  
It's highly related to our sense of personal security.    If our personal security comes from sources within  ourselves, then we have the strength to practice 
the habits of Public Victory.  If we are emotionall y insecure, even though we may be intellectually very 
advanced, practicing Habits 4, 5, and 6 with people wh o think differently on jugular issues of life can be 
terribly threatening.    Where does intrinsic security come from? It do esn't come from the scripts they've handed us.  It 
doesn't come from our circumstances or our position.    It comes from within.  It comes from accurat e paradigms and correct principles deep in our own 
mind and heart.  It comes from Insi de-Out congruence, from living a life  of integrity in which our daily 
habits reflect our deepest values.    I believe that a life of integrity is the most fun damental source of personal worth.  I do not agree 
with the popular success literature that  says that self-esteem is primarily  a matter of mindset, of attitude 
-- that you can psyche yourself into peace of mind.    Peace of mind comes when your life is in harmon y with true principles an d values and in no other 
way.    There is also the intrinsic security that comes as a result of effective interd ependent living.  There is 
security in knowing that win-win solutions do exist, that life is not always "either/or," that there are 
almost always mutually beneficial Third Alternatives .  There is security in kn owing that you can step 
out of your own frame of reference without giving it  up, that you can really, deeply understand another 
human being.  There is security  that comes when you authentica lly, creatively, and cooperatively 
interact with other people and really e xperience these interdependent habits. 
   There is intrinsic security that comes from servic e, from helping other people in a meaningful way.  
One important source is your work, when you see yourself in a contri butive and creative mode, really 
making a difference.  Another source is anonymous service -- no one knows it and no one necessarily 
ever will.  And that's not the concern; the concern is  blessing the lives of other people.  Influence, not 
recognition, becomes the motive.    Viktor Frankl focused on the need for meaning and purpose in ou r lives, something that transcends 
our own lives and taps the best en ergies within us.  The late Dr. Hans Selye, in his monumental 
research on stress, basically says that a long, healthy, and happy life is the result of making 
contributions, of having meaningful projects that are  personally exciting and contribute to and bless the 
lives of others.  His ethic was "earn thy neighbor's love.    This is the true joy in life -- that being used for a purpose recogniz ed by yourself as a mighty one.  
That being a force of nature, instead of a feverish , selfish little clod of ailments and grievances 
complaining that the world will not devote itself to  making you happy.  I am of the opinion that my 
life belongs to the whole community and as long as I live it is my privilege to do for it whatever I can.  
I want to be thoroughly used up when I die.  For th e harder I work the more I live.  I rejoice in life for 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
its own sake.  Life is no brief candle to me.  It's a sort of splendid torch which I've got to hold up for 
t h e  m o m e n t  a n d  I  w a n t  t o  m a k e  i t  b u r n  a s  b r i g h t ly as possible before handing it on to future 
generations.    N.  Eldon Tanner has said, "Service is the rent we pay for the privilege of living on this earth." And there are so many ways to serve.  Whether or no t we belong to a church or service organization or 
have a job that provides meaningful service opportunit ies, not a day goes by that we can't at least serve 
one other human being by making deposits of unconditional love.  Scripting Others     Most people are a function of  the social mirror, scripted by th e opinions, the perceptions, the 
paradigms of the people around th em.  As interdependent people, you and I come from a paradigm 
which includes the realization that we are a part of that social mirror. 
   We can choose to reflect back to others a cle ar, undistorted vision of themselves.  We can affirm 
their proactive nature and treat them as respon sible people.  We can help script them as 
principle-centered, value-based, independent, wort hwhile individuals.  And, with the Abundance 
Mentality, we realize that giving a positive reflection to others in no way diminishes us.  It increases us 
because it increases the opportunities for effe ctive interaction with other proactive people. 
   At some time in your life, you probably had someone believe in you when  you didn't believe in 
yourself.  He or she scripted you.  Did that make a difference in your life.    What if you were a positive scripter, an affirme r, of other people? When they're being directed by 
the social mirror to take the lower path, you inspire them toward a hi gher path because you believe in 
them.  You listen to them and empathize with them .  You don't absolve them of responsibility; you 
encourage them to be proactive.    Perhaps you are familiar with the musical, Man of La Mancha.  It's a beautiful story about a 
medieval knight who meets a woman of the street, a pr ostitute.  She's being validated in her life-style 
by all of the people in her life.    But this poet knight sees something else in he r, something beautiful and lovely.  He also sees her 
virtue, and he affirms it, over and over again.  He gives her a new name -- Dulcinea -- a new name 
associated with a new paradigm.    At first, she utterly denies it; her old scripts are overpowering.  She writes him off as a wild-eyed 
fantasizer.  But he is persistent.  He makes contin ual deposits of unconditional love and gradually it 
penetrates her scripting.  It goes down into her true  nature, her potential, an d she starts to respond.  
Little by little, she begins to change her life-style.  She believes it and she acts from her new paradigm, 
to the initial dismay of everyone else in her life.    Later, when she begins to revert to her old p aradigm, he calls her to his deathbed and sings that 
beautiful song, "The Impossible Dream," looks her in the eyes, and whispers, "Never forget, you're 
Dulcinea."    One of the classic stories in th e field of self-fulfilling prophecies is of a computer in England that was 
accidentally programmed incorrectly.  In academic term s, it labeled a class of "bright" kids "dumb" and 
a class of supposedly "dumb" kids "bright." And that  computer report was the primary criterion that 
created the teachers' paradigms about thei r students at the beginning of the year. 
   When the administration finally discovered the mistake five-and-a-half months later, they decided 
to test the kids again without telling anyone what  had happened.  And the results were amazing.  The 
"bright" kids had gone down significantly in IQ test points.  They had been seen and treated as 
mentally limited, uncooperative, and difficult to  teach.  The teachers' paradigms had become a 
self-fulfilling prophecy.  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   But the scores in the supposedly "dumb" group had gone up.  The teachers had treated them as 
though they were bright, and their energy, their ho pe, their optimism, their excitement had reflected 
high individual expectations and worth for those kids.    These teachers were asked what it was like du ring the first few weeks of the term.  "For some 
reason, our methods weren't working," they rep lied.  "So we had to change our methods." The 
information showed that the kids wer e bright.  If things weren't workin g well, they figured it had to be 
the teaching methods.  So they worked on methods.  They were proactive; they worked in their Circle 
of Influence.  Apparent learner disability was nothing more or less than teacher inflexibility. 
   What do we reflect to others about themselves? And how much does that reflection influence their 
lives? We have so much we can invest in the Emotio nal Bank Accounts of other people.  The more we 
can see people in terms of their unseen potential,  the more we can use our im agination rather than our 
memory, with our spouse, our children, our co-workers  or employees.  We can refuse to label them -- 
we can "see" them in new fresh ways each time we're with them.  We can help them become 
independent, fulfilled people capable of deeply satisf ying, enriching, and productive relationships with 
others.    Goethe taught, "Treat a man as he is and he will remain as he is.  Treat a man as he can and should 
be and he will become as he can and should be."  Balance in Renewal     The self-renewal process must include balanced renewal in all four dimens ions of our nature: the 
physical, the spiritual, the mental, and the social/emotional.    Although renewal in each dimension is importan t, it only becomes optima lly effective as we deal 
with all four dimensions in a wise and balanced wa y.  To neglect any one area negatively impacts the 
rest.    I have found this to be true in organizations as  well as in individual lives .  In an organization, the 
physical dimension is expressed in economic term s.  The mental or psychological dimension deals 
with the recognition, development, and use of talent .  The social/emotional dimension has to do with 
human relations, with finding meaning through purp ose or contribution and through organizational 
integrity.    When an organization neglects any one or more  of these areas, it negatively impacts the entire 
organization.  The creative energies that could resu lt in tremendous, positive synergy are instead used 
to fight against the organization and become re straining forces to growth and productivity. 
   I have found organizations whose only thrust is  economic -- to make mo ney.  They usually don't 
publicize that purpose.  They sometimes even public ize something else.  But in their hearts, their only 
desire is to make money.    Whenever I find this, I also find a great deal of negative synergy in the culture, generating such 
things as interdepartmental rivalries, defensiv e and protective communication, politicking, and 
masterminding.  We can't effectively thrive without making money, but that's not sufficient reason for 
organizational existence.  We can't live without eating, but we don't live to eat.    At the other end of the spectrum, I've seen or ganizations that focused al most exclusively on the 
social/emotional dimension.  They are, in a sense, some kind of social experiment and they have no 
economic criteria to their value system.  They have no measure or gauge of their effectiveness, and as a 
result, they lose all kinds of efficiencies an d eventually their viability in the marketplace. 
   I have found many organizations that develop as  many as three of the dimensions -- they may have 
good service criteria, good economic criteria, and g ood human-relations criteria, but they are not really 
committed to identifying, developing, utilizing, and recognizing the talent of people.  And if these 
psychological forces are missing, the style will be a benevolent autocracy and the resulting culture will 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
reflect different forms of collective resistance, ad versarialism, excessive turnover, and other deep, 
chronic, cultural problems.    Organizational as well as individual effectiv eness requires development and renewal of all four 
dimensions in a wise and balanced way.  Any dime nsion that is neglected w ill create negative force 
field resistance that pushes against effectiveness an d growth.  Organizations and individuals that give 
recognition to each of these four dimensions in their mission statement provide a powerful framework 
for balanced renewal.    This process of continuous improvement is the hallmark of the Total Quality movement and a key to 
Japan's economic ascendancy.  Synergy in Renewal     Balanced renewal is optimally synergetic.  The things you do to sharpen the saw in any one 
dimension have positive impact in  other dimensions because they are so highly interrelated.  Your 
physical health affects your mental health; your spiritual strength affects your social/emotional 
strength.  As you improve in one dimension, you in crease your ability in other dimensions as well. 
   The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People create optimum synergy among these dimensions.  
Renewal in any dimension increases your ability to liv e at least one of the Seven Habits.  And although 
the habits are sequential, improvement in one habit sy nergetically increases your ability to live the rest. 
   The more proactive you are (Habit 1), the more  effectively you can exercise personal leadership 
(Habit 2) and management (Habit 3) in your life.  The more effectively you ma nage your life (Habit 3), 
the more Quadrant II renewing activities you can do (Habit 7).  The more you seek first to understand 
(Habit 5), the more effectively you can go for synerg etic win-win solutions (Hab its 4 and 6).  The more 
you improve in any of the habits that lead to inde pendence (Habits 1, 2, and 3), the more effective you 
will be in interdependent situatio ns (Habits 4, 5, and 6).  And renewal (Habit 7) is the process of 
renewing all the habits.    As you renew your physical dimension, you rein force your personal vision (Habit 1), the paradigm 
of your own self-awareness and free will, of proactivity, of knowing that you are free to act instead of being acted upon, to choose your own response to any stimulus.  This is probably the greatest benefit 
of physical exercise.  Each Daily Private Victory makes a deposit in your personal intrinsic security 
account.    As you renew your spiritual dimension, you re inforce your personal leadership (Habit 2).  You 
increase your ability to live out of your imaginatio n and conscience instead of only your memory, to 
deeply understand your innermost paradigms and values , to create within yourself a center of correct 
principles, to define your own uniq ue mission in life, to rescript your self to live your life in harmony 
with correct principles and to draw upon your pers onal sources of strength.  The rich private life you 
create in spiritual renewal makes tremendous deposits in your personal security account. 
   As you renew your mental dimension, you reinfo rce your personal management (Habit 3).  As you 
plan, you force your mind to re cognize high-leverage Quadrant II activities, priority goals, and 
activities to maximize the use of your time and en ergy, and you organize and execute your activities 
around your priorities.  As you become involved  in continuing education, you increase your 
knowledge base and you increase your options.  Your economic security does not lie in your job; it lies 
in your own power to produce -- to think, to learn, to create, to adapt.  That's true financial independence.  It's not having wealth; it's having  the power to produce we alth.  It's intrinsic. 
   The Daily Private Victory -- a minimum of one hour  a day in renewal of the physical, spiritual, and 
mental dimensions -- is the key to the development of  the Seven Habits and it's completely within your 
Circle of Influence.  It is the Qu adrant II focus time necessary to integ rate these habits into your life, to 
become principle-centered. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   It's also the foundation for the Daily Public Victor y.  It's the source of intrinsic security you need to 
sharpen the saw in the social/emoti onal dimension.  It gives you th e personal strength to focus on 
your Circle of Influence in inte rdependent situations -- to look at others through the Abundance 
Mentality paradigm, to genuinely va lue their differences and to be happy for their success.  It gives 
you the foundation to work for genuine understanding and for synergetic win-win solutions, to practice 
Habits 4, 5, and 6 in an interdependent reality.  The Upward Spiral     Renewal is the principle -- an d the process -- that empowers us to  move on an upward spiral of 
growth and change, of continuous improvement.    To make meaningful and consistent progress alon g that spiral, we need to consider one other aspect 
of renewal as it applies to the unique human en dowment that directs this upward movement -- our 
conscience.  In the words of Madame de Sta'l, "The vo ice of conscience is so delicate that it is easy to 
stifle it: but it is also so clear th at it is impossible to mistake it." 
   Conscience is the endowment that senses our congruence or disparity with correct principles and 
lifts us toward them -- when it's in shape    Just as the education of nerve and sinew is vital to the excellent athlete and education of the mind is 
vital to the scholar, education of the conscience is vita l to the truly proactive, highly effective person.  
Training and educating the conscience, however, requ ires even greater concentration, more balanced 
discipline, more consistently honest living.  It requir es regular feasting on inspiring literature, thinking 
noble thoughts and, above all, living in harmony with its still small voice 
   Just as junk food and lack of exercise can ruin an athlete's condition, thos e things that are obscene, 
crude, or pornographic can breed an inner darkness that numbs our higher sensibilities and substitutes 
the social conscience of "Will I be found out?" for the natural or divine conscience of "What is right and 
wrong?"    In the words of Dag Hammarskjold,    You cannot play with the animal in you with out becoming wholly animal, play with falsehood 
without forfeiting your right to truth, play with cr uelty without losing your sensitivity of mind.  He 
who wants to keep his garden tidy doesn't reserve a plot for weeds.    Once we are self-aware, we must choose purposes and principles to live by; otherwise the vacuum 
will be filled, and we will lose our self-awareness an d become like groveling animals who live primarily 
for survival and propagation.  People who exist on th at level aren't living; they are "being lived." They 
are reacting, unaware of the unique endowmen ts that lie dormant and undeveloped within. 
   And there is no shortcut in developing them. The Law of the Harvest governs; we will always reap 
what we sow -- no more, no less.  The law of justic e is immutable, and the closer we align ourselves 
with correct principles, the better our judgment w ill be about how the worl d operates and the more 
accurate our paradigms -- our maps  of the territory -- will be. 
   I believe that as we grow and develop on this upward spiral, we must show diligence in the process 
of renewal by educating and obeying our conscience.  An increasingly educated conscience will propel 
us along the path of personal freedom, security, wisdom, and power.    Moving along the upward spiral requires us to learn, commit, and do on incr easingly higher planes.  
We deceive ourselves if we think that any one of these is sufficient.  To keep progressing, we must 
learn, commit, and do -- learn, commit, and do -- and learn, commit, and do again. 
 Application Suggestions: