T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
Habit 2: Begin with the End in Mind TM 
 
   What lies behind us and what lies before us  are tiny matters compared to what lies within us 
   -- Oliver Wendell Holme 
                *          
   Please find a place to read these next few pa ges where you can be alone and uninterrupted.  Clear 
your mind of everything except what you will read  and what I will invite you to do.  Don't worry 
about your schedule, your business, your family, or your friends.  Just focus with me and really open 
your mind.    In your mind's eye, see yourself going to the funeral parlor or chapel, parking the car, and getting 
out.  As you walk inside the building, you notice th e flowers, the soft organ music.  You see the faces 
of friends and family you pass along the way.  You feel the shared sorrow of lo sing, the joy of having 
known, that radiates from the hearts of the people there.    As you walk down to the front of the room an d look inside the casket, you suddenly come face to 
face with yourself.  This is your funeral, three years  from today.  All these people have come to honor 
you, to express feelings of love and appreciation for your life.    As you take a seat and wait for the services to begin, you look at the program in your hand.  There 
are to be four speakers.  The first one is from yo ur family, immediate and al so extended -- children, 
brothers, sisters, nephews, nieces, aunts, uncles, cousins, and grandparents who have come from all 
over the country to attend.  The second speaker is one of your friends, someone who can give a sense 
of what you were as a person.  The third speaker is from your work or profession.  And the fourth is 
from your church or some community organizat ion where you've been involved in service. 
   Now think deeply.  What would you like each of  these speakers to say about you and your life? 
What kind of husband, wife, father, or mother woul d you like their words to reflect? What kind of son 
or daughter or cousin? What kind of fr iend? What kind of working associate? 
   What character would you like them to have seen  in you? What contributi ons, what achievements 
would you want them to remember? Look carefully at the people around you.  What difference would 
you like to have made in their lives?    Before you read further, take a few minutes to jo t down your impressions.  It will greatly increase 
your personal understanding of Habit 2.  What it Means to "Begin with the End in Mind"     If you participated seriously in this visuali zation experience, you touched for a moment some of 
your deep, fundamental values.  You established brie f contact with that inner guidance system at the 
heart of your Circle of Influence    Consider the words of Joseph Addison:    When I look upon the tombs of the great, ev ery emotion of envy dies in me; when I read the 
epitaphs of the beautiful, every inordinate desire goes  out; when I meet with th e grief of parents upon a 
tombstone, my heart melts with co mpassion; when I see the tomb of the parents themselves, I consider 
the vanity of grieving for those whom we must quickly follow: when  I see kings lying by those who 
deposed them, I consider rival wits placed side by side, or the holy men that divided the world with 
their contests and disputes, I reflect with sorrow an d astonishment on the little competitions, factions, 
and debates of mankind.  When I read the several date s of the tombs, of some that died yesterday, and 
some six hundred years ago, I consider that great Day when we shall all of us be Contemporaries, and 
make our appearance together.    Although Habit 2 applies to many different circ umstances and levels of lif e, the most fundamental 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
application of "Begin with the End in Mind" is to be gin today with the image, picture, or paradigm of 
the end of your life as your frame of reference or the criterion by which everything else is examined.  Each part of your life -- today's behavior, tomorro w's behavior, next week's behavior, next month's 
behavior -- can be examined in the context of the whole, of what really matters most to you.  By 
keeping that end clearly in mind, you can make ce rtain that whatever you do on any particular day 
does not violate the criteria you have defined as su premely important, and that each day of your life 
contributes in a meaningful way to the vi sion you have of your life as a whole. 
   To Begin with the End in Mind  means to start with a clear unders tanding of your destination.  It 
means to know where you're going so that you bette r understand where you are now and so that the 
steps you take are always in the right direction.    It's incredibly easy to get caught up in an acti vity trap, in the busy-ness of  life, to work harder and 
harder at climbing the ladder of success only to disc over it's leaning against the wrong wall.  It is 
possible to be busy -- very busy -- without being very effective. 
   People often find themselves achieving victorie s that are empty, successes that have come at the 
expense of things they suddenly realize were far mo re valuable to them.  People from every walk of 
life -- doctors, academicians, actors, politicians, busi ness professionals, athletes, and plumbers -- often 
struggle to achieve a higher income, more recognitio n or a certain degree of professional competence, 
only to find that their drive to ac hieve their goal blinded them to th e things that really mattered most 
and now are gone.    How different our lives are when we really know what is deeply important to us, and, keeping that 
picture in mind, we manage ourselves each day to be and to do what really matters most.  If the ladder 
is not leaning against the right wall, every step we take  just gets us to the wrong place faster.  We may 
be very busy, we may be very effici ent, but we will also be truly effect ive only when we Begin with the 
End in Mind.    If you carefully consider what you wanted to be said of you in the funeral experience, you will find 
your definition of success.  It may be very different  from the definition you thought you had in mind.  
Perhaps fame, achievement, money, or some of the ot her things we strive for are not even part of the 
right wall.    When you Begin with the End in Mind, you gain  a different perspective.  One man asked another 
on the death of a mutual friend, "How much did he  leave?" His friend responded, "He left it all." 
 All Things Are Created Twice     "Begin with the End in Mind" is based on the pr inciple that all things are created twice.  There's a 
mental or first creation, and a physical  or second creation to all things 
   Take the construction of a home, for example.  You create it in every detail before you ever hammer 
the first nail into place.  You try to get a very cle ar sense of what kind of house you want.  If you want 
a family-centered home, you plan a family room wh ere it would be a natural gathering place.  You 
plan sliding doors and a patio for children to play outside.  You work with ideas.  You work with 
your mind until you get a clear image of what you want to build.    Then you reduce it to blueprint and develop constr uction plans.  All of this  is done before the earth 
is touched.  If not, then in the second creation, the physical creation, you will have to make expensive 
changes that may double the cost of your home.    The carpenter's rule is "measure twice, cut once."  You have to make sure th at the blueprint, the first 
creation, is really what you want, that you've though t everything through.  Then  you put it into bricks 
and mortar.  Each day you go to the construction shed and pull out the blueprint to get marching 
orders for the day.  You Begin with the End in Mind.    For another example, look at a business.  If you want to have a successful enterprise, you clearly 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
define what you're trying to accomplish.  You care fully think through the product or service you want 
to provide in terms of your market target, then you organize all the elements -- financial, research and 
development, operations, marketing, pe rsonnel, physical facilities, and so on -- to meet that objective.  
The extent to which you Begin with the End in Mind  often determines whether or not you are able to 
create a successful enterprise.  Most business failures begin in the first creation, with problems such as 
undercapitalization, misunderstanding of the market, or lack of a business plan. 
   The same is true with parentin g.  If you want to raise responsi ble, self-disciplined children, you 
have to keep that end clearly in mind as you inte ract with your children on a daily basis.  You can't 
behave toward them in ways that underm ine their self-discipline or self-esteem. 
   To varying degrees, people use this principle in  many different areas of lif e.  Before you go on a 
trip, you determine your destination and plan out the best route.  Before you plant a garden, you plan 
it out in your mind, possibly on paper.  You crea te speeches on paper before you give them, you 
envision the landscaping in your yard before you la ndscape it, you design the clothes you make before 
you thread the needle.    To the extent to which we understand the princi ple of two creations and a ccept the responsibility for 
both, we act within and enlarge the bo rders of our Circle of Influence.  To the extent to which we do 
not operate in harmony with this principle and ta ke charge of the first creation, we diminish it. 
 By Design or Default     It's a principle that all things are created twice, but not all first creations are by conscious design.  In 
our personal lives, if we do not develop our own self-awareness and become responsible for first creations, we empower other people and circumstance s outside our Circle or Influence to shape much 
of our lives by default.  We reactively live the scripts  handed to us by family, associates, other people's 
agendas, the pressures of circum stance -- scripts from our earlie r years, from our training, our 
conditioning    These scripts come from people, not principles.  And they rise out of our deep vulnerabilities, our 
deep dependency on others and our need for acce ptance and love, for belonging, for a sense of 
importance and worth, for a feeling that we matter.    Whether we are aware of it or not, whether we are in  control of it or not, there is a first creation to 
every part of our lives.  We are either the second creation of our own proactive design, or we are the 
second creation of other people's agendas, of circumstances, or of past habits    The unique human capacities of self-awareness, imagination, and conscience enable us to examine 
first creations and make it possible for us to take charge of our own first creation, to write our own 
script.  Put another way, Habit 1 says, "You are  the creator." Habit 2 is the first creation. 
 Leadership and Management -- The Two Creations     Habit 2 is based on principles of personal le adership, which means that leadership is the first 
creation.  Leadership is not management.  Manage ment is the second crea tion, which we'll discuss in 
the chapter on Habit 3.  But le adership has to come first. 
   Management is a bottom-line focus: How can I best accomplish certain things? Leadership deals 
with the top line: What are the things I want to accomplish? In the words of both Peter Drucker and 
Warren Bennis, "Management is doing th ings right; leadership is doin g the right things." Management 
is efficiency in climbing the ladder of success; leadership determines whether the ladder is leaning 
against the right wall.    You can quickly grasp the important differenc e between the two if you envision a group of 
producers cutting their way through the jungle with  machetes.  They're the producers, the problem 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
solvers.  They're cutting through th e undergrowth, clearing it out. 
   The managers are behind them, sharpening thei r machetes, writing policy and procedure manuals, 
holding muscle development programs, bringing in improved technologies, and setting up working 
schedules and compensation programs for machete wielders.    The leader is the one who climbs the tallest tr ee, surveys the entire situ ation, and yells, "Wrong 
jungle!"    But how do the busy, efficient producers and managers often respond?  "Shut up! We're making progress."    As individuals, groups, and businesses, we're often so busy cutting through the undergrowth we 
don't even realize we're in the wr ong jungle.  And the rapidly changing environment in which we live 
makes effective leadership more critical than it ha s ever been -- in every aspect of independent and 
interdependent life.    We are more in need of a vision or designation and a compass (a set of principles or directions) and 
less in need of a road map.  We often don't know what the terrain ahead will be like or what we will 
need to go through it; much will depend on our judgment at the time.  But an inner compass will always give us direction.    Effectiveness -- often even survival -- does not depend solely on how much effort we expend, but on 
whether or not the effort we expend is in the righ t jungle.  And the metamorphosis taking place in 
most every industry and profession demand s leadership first and management second. 
   In business, the market is changing so rapidly th at many products and servic es that successfully met 
consumer tastes and needs a few years ago are obso lete today.  Proactive powerful leadership must 
constantly monitor environmental change, particul arly customer buying habits and motives, and 
provide the force necessary to organize resources in the right direction.    Such changes as deregulation of  the airline industry, skyrocketing costs of health care, and the great 
quality and quantity of imported cars impact the envi ronment in significant ways.  If industries do not 
monitor the environment, including their own work team s, and exercise the creative leadership to keep 
headed in the right direction, no amount of ma nagement expertise can keep them from failing. 
   Efficient management without effective lead ership is, as one individual phrased it, "like 
straightening deck chairs on the Titanic." No ma nagement success can compensate for failure in 
leadership.  But leadership is hard because we're often caught in a management paradigm. 
   At the final session of a year-long executive deve lopment program in Seattle,  the president of an oil 
company came up to me and said, "Stephen, when you pointed out the difference between leadership 
and management in the second month, I looked at  my role as the presid ent of this company and 
realized that I had never been into leadership.  I was deep into management, buried by pressing 
challenges and the details of day-to-day logistics.   So I decided to withdraw from management.  I 
could get other people to do that.  I wanted to really lead my organization.    "It was hard.  I went through withdrawal pains be cause I stopped dealing with a lot of the pressing, 
urgent matters that were right in front of me and wh ich gave me a sense of immediate accomplishment.  
I didn't receive much satisfaction as I started wres tling with the direction is sues, the culture-building 
issues, the deep analysis of problems, the seizing of new opportunities.  Others also went through 
withdrawal pains from their working style comfort zones.  They missed the easy accessibility I had 
given them before.  They still wanted me to be av ailable to them, to respond, to help solve their 
problems on a day-to-day basis.    "But I persisted.  I was absolutely convinced that I needed to provide leadership.  And I did.  
Today our whole business is different.  We're more in line with our environment.  We have doubled 
our revenues and quadrupled our profits.  I'm into leadership."    I'm convinced that too often parents are also trapped in the management paradigm, thinking of 
control, efficiency, and rules instead of direction, purpose, and family feeling. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   And leadership is even more lacking in our pe rsonal lives.  We're into managing with efficiency, 
setting and achieving goals before we have even clarified our values. 
 Rescripting:  Becoming Your Own First Creator     As we previously observed, proactivity is based on the unique human endowment of self-awareness.  
The two additional unique human endo wments that enable us to expand  our proactivity and to exercise 
personal leadership in our lives  are imagination and conscience. 
   Through imagination, we can visualize the uncr eated worlds of potential that lie within us.  
Through conscience, we can come in contact with univ ersal laws or principles with our own singular 
talents and avenues of contribution, and with th e personal guidelines within which we can most 
effectively develop them.  Combined with self-aw areness, these two endowmen ts empower us to write 
our own script.    Because we already live with many scripts that ha ve been handed to us, the process of writing our 
own script is actually more a process of "rescripting,"  or Paradigm Shifting -- of changing some of the 
basic paradigms that we already have.  As we reco gnize the ineffective scripts, the incorrect or 
incomplete paradigms within us, we can pr oactively begin to rescript ourselves. 
   I think one of the most inspiring accounts of the rescripting process comes from the autobiography 
of Anwar Sadat, past president of Egypt.  Sadat ha d been reared, nurtured, an d deeply scripted in a 
hatred for Israel.  He would make the statement on na tional television, "I will never shake the hand of 
a n  I s r a e l i  a s  l o n g  a s  t h e y  o c c u p y  o n e  i n ch  o f  A rab soil.  Never, never, never!" And huge crowds all 
around the country would chant, "Never, never, neve r!" He marshaled the energy and unified the will 
of the whole country in that script.    The script was very independent and nationalistic,  and it aroused deep emotions in the people.  But 
it was also very foolish, and Sadat knew it.  It igno red the perilous, highly interdependent reality of the 
situation.    So he rescripted himself.  It was a process he  had learned when he was a young man imprisoned in 
Cell 54, a solitary cell in Cairo Central Prison, as a resu lt of his involvement in a conspiracy plot against 
King Farouk.  He learned to withdraw from his ow n mind and look at it to see if the scripts were 
appropriate and wise.  He learned how to vacate hi s own mind and, through a deep personal process 
of meditation, to work with his own scriptures,  his own form of prayer, and rescript himself. 
   He records that he was almost loath to leave his prison cell because it was there that he realized that 
real success is success with self.  It's not in having  things, but in having mastery, having victory over 
self.    For a period of time during Nasser's administrat ion Sadat was relegated to a position of relative 
insignificance.  Everyone felt that his spirit was br oken, but it wasn't.  They  were projecting their own 
home movies onto him.  They didn't understand him.  He was biding his time.    And when that time came, when  he became president of Egypt and confronted the political realities, 
he rescripted himself toward Israel.  He visited th e Knesset in Jerusalem and opened up one of the 
most precedent-breaking peace moveme nts in the history of the world, a bold initiative that eventually 
brought about the Camp David Accord.    Sadat was able to use his self-awareness, his im agination, and his conscien ce to exercise personal 
leadership, to change an essential paradigm, to change the way he saw the situation.  He worked in the 
center of his Circle of Influence.  And from that rescripting, that change in  paradigm, flowed changes 
in behavior and attitude that affected millions  of lives in the wider Circle of Concern. 
   In developing our own self-awareness many of  us discover ineffective scripts, deeply embedded 
habits that are totally unworthy of us, totally incongruent with the things  we really value in life.  Habit 
2 says we don't have to live with those scripts.  We are response-able to use our imagination and 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
creativity to write new ones that are more effective,  more congruent with our deepest values and with 
the correct principles that give our values meaning.    Suppose, for example, that I am highly overreac tive to my children.  Suppose that whenever they 
begin to do something I feel is inappropriate, I sens e an immediate tensing in the pit of my stomach.  I 
feel defensive walls go up; I prepare for battle.  My focus is not on th e long-term growth and 
understanding but on the short-term behavior.  I'm trying to win the battle, not the war. 
   I pull out my ammunition -- my superior size, my position of authority -- and I yell or intimidate or I 
threaten or punish.  And I win.  I stand there, vi ctorious, in the middle of the debris of a shattered 
relationship while my children are outwardly submi ssive and inwardly rebellious, suppressing feelings 
that will come out later in uglier ways.    Now if I were sitting at that funeral we visu alized earlier, and one of my children was about to 
speak, I would want his life to represent the victor y of teaching, training, an d disciplining with love 
over a period of years rather than the battle scars of  quick-fix skirmishes.  I would want his heart and 
mind to be filled with the pleasant memories of d eep, meaningful times together.  I would want him to 
remember me as a loving father who shared the fun and the pain of growing up.  I would want him to 
remember the times he came to me  with his problems and concerns.  I would want to have listened 
and loved and helped.  I would want him to know I wa sn't perfect, but that I had tried with everything 
I had.  And that, perhaps more than anybody in the world, I loved him.    The reason I would want those things is becaus e, deep down, I value my children.  I love them, I 
want to help them.  I value my role as their father.    But I don't always see those values.  I get caught up in the "thick of thin things." What matters most 
gets buried under layers of pressing problems, im mediate concerns, and outward behaviors.  I become 
reactive.  And the way I interact with my children ev ery day often bears little resemblance to the way I 
deeply feel about them.    Because I am self-aware, because I have imag ination and conscience, I can examine my deepest 
values.  I can realize that the script I'm living is no t in harmony with those values, that my life is not 
the product of my own proactive design, but the re sult of the first creation I have deferred to 
circumstances and other people.  And I can change.  I can live out of my imagination instead of my 
memory.  I can tie myself to my limitless potential instead of my limiting past.  I can become my own 
first creator.    To Begin with the End in Mind means to approach  my role as a parent, as well as my other roles in 
life, with my values and directions clear.  It mean s to be responsible for my own first creation, to 
rescript myself so that the paradigms from which my behavior and attitude flow are congruent with my 
deepest values and in harmony with correct principles.    It also means to begin each day with those values  firmly in mind.  Then as  the vicissitudes, as the 
challenges come, I can make my decisions based on those values.  I can act with integrity.  I don't 
have to react to the emotion, the circumstance.  I can be truly proactive, value driven, because my 
values are clear.  A Personal Mission Statement     The most effective way I know to Begin with the End in Mind is to develop a personal mission 
statement or philosophy or creed.  It focuses on  what you want to be (character) and to do 
(contributions and achievements) and on the values  or principles upon which being and doing are 
based    Because each individual is unique, a personal mi ssion statement will reflect that uniqueness, both in 
content and form.  My friend, Rolfe Kerr, has expressed his personal creed in this way: 
   Succeed at home first.  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Seek and merit divine help. 
   Never compromise with honesty.    Remember the people involved.    Hear both sides before judging.    Obtain counsel of others.    Defend those who are absent.    Be sincere yet decisive.    Develop one new proficiency a year.    Plan tomorrow's work today.    Hustle while you wait.    Maintain a positive attitude.     Keep a sense of humor.    Be orderly in person and in work.    Do not fear mistakes -- fear on ly the absence of creative, constructive, and corrective responses to 
those mistakes.    Facilitate the success of subordinates.    Listen twice as much as you speak.    Concentrate all abilities and efforts on the ta sk at hand, not worrying about the next job or 
promotion.    A woman seeking to balance family and work va lues has expressed her sense of personal mission 
differently:    I will seek to balance career and family as best I can since both are important to me.    My home will be a place where I and my family, friends, and guests find joy, comfort, peace, and 
happiness.  Still I will seek to create a clean and or derly environment, yet livable and comfortable.  I 
will exercise wisdom in what we choose to eat, read, see, and do at home.  I especially want to teach 
my children to love, to learn, and to laugh -- and to work and develop their unique talents.    I value the rights, freedoms, and responsibilities of our democratic society.  I will be a concerned 
and informed citizen, involved in the political proc ess to ensure my voice is  heard and my vote is 
counted.    I will be a self-starting individual who exercises initiative in accomplishing my life's goals.  I will 
act on situations and opportunitie s, rather than to be acted upon. 
   I will always try to keep myself free from addi ctive and destructive habits.  I will develop habits 
that free me from old labels and limits and expand my capabilities and choices.    My money will be my servant, not my master.  I will seek financial independence over time.  My 
wants will be subject to my needs and my means.  Ex cept for long-term home and car loans, I will seek 
to keep myself free from consumer debt.  I will spend less than I earn and regularly save or invest part 
of my income.    Moreover, I will use what money and talents I ha ve to make life more en joyable for others through 
service and charitable giving.    You could call a personal mission statement a personal constitution.  Like the United States 
Constitution, it's fundamentally changeless.  In over 200 years, there have been only 26 amendments, 
10 of which were in the original Bill of Rights.    The United States Constitution is the standard by which every law in the country is evaluated.  It is 
the document the president agrees to defend and suppo rt when he takes the Oath of Allegiance.  It is 
the criterion by which people are admitted into citize nship.  It is the foundation and the center that 
enables people to ride through such major traumas as the Civil War, Vietnam, or Watergate.  It is the 
written standard, the key criterion by which everything else is evaluated and directed. 
   The Constitution has endured and serves its vi tal function today because it is based on correct 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
principles, on the self-evident truths contained in  the Declaration of Independ ence.  These principles 
empower the Constitution with a ti meless strength, even in the midst of social ambiguity and change.  
"Our peculiar security," said Thomas Jefferson, "is in the possession of a written Constitution." 
   A personal mission statement based on correct pr inciples becomes the same kind of standard for an 
individual.  It becomes a personal constitution, the basis for making major, life-directing decisions, the 
basis for making daily decisions in the midst of the circumstances and em otions that affect our lives.  It 
empowers individuals with the same timele ss strength in the midst of change.  
   People can't live with change if there's not a ch angeless core inside them.  The key to the ability to 
change is a changeless sense of who you are , what you are about and what you value. 
   With a mission statement, we can flow with chan ges.  We don't need prejudgments or prejudices.  
We don't need to figure out everything else in life, to stereotype and categorize everything and 
everybody in order to accommodate reality    Our personal environment is also changing at an ever-increasing pace.  Such rapid change burns 
out a large number of people who feel they can hard ly handle it, can hardly cope with life.  They 
become reactive and essentially give up, hoping th at the things that happen to them will be good. 
   But it doesn't have to be that way.  In the Nazi death camps where Viktor Frankl learned the 
principle of proactivity, he also learned the importan ce of purpose, of meaning in life.  The essence of 
"logotherapy," the philosophy he later developed an d taught, is that many so-called mental and 
emotional illnesses are really symptoms of an unde rlying sense of meaninglessness or emptiness.  
Logotherapy eliminates that emptiness by helping th e individual to detect his unique meaning, his 
mission in life.    Once you have that sense of mission, you have the essence of your own proactivity.  You have the 
vision and the values which direct your life.  Yo u have the basic direction from which you set your 
long- and short-term goals.  You have the power of a written constitution based on correct principles, 
against which every decision concerning the most e ffective use of your time, your talents, and your 
energies can be effectively measured.  At the Center     In order to write a personal mission statement, we must begin at the very center of our Circle of 
Influence, that center comprised of our most ba sic Our paradigms, the lens through which we see the 
world.    It is here that we deal with our vision and ou r values.  It is here that we use our endowment of 
self-awareness to examine our maps and, if we value correct principles, to make certain that our maps 
accurately describe the territory, that our paradigms are based on principles  and reality.  It is here that 
we use our endowment of conscience as a compass to help us detect our own unique talents and areas 
of contribution.  It is here th at we use our endowment of imaginat ion to mentally create the end we 
desire, giving direction and purpose to our begi nnings and providing the substance of a written 
personal constitution.    It is also here that our focused efforts achiev e the greatest results.  As we work within the very 
center of our Circle of Influence, we expand it .  This is highest-leverage PC work, significantly 
impacting the effectiveness of every aspect of our lives.    Whatever is at the center of our life will be th e source of our security, guidance, wisdom, and power. 
   Security represents your sense of worth, your identity, your emotional anchorage, your self-esteem, 
your basic personal strength or lack of it.    Guidance means your source of direction in life.   Encompassed by your map, your internal frame of 
reference that interprets for you what is happening out there, are standards or principles or implicit 
criteria that govern moment-by-moment decision-making and doing. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Wisdom is your perspective on life, your sens e of balance, your understanding of how the various 
parts and principles apply and relate to each  other.  It embraces judgment, discernment, 
comprehension.  It is a gestalt or oneness, an integrated wholeness. 
   Power is the faculty or capacity to act, the stre ngth and potency to accomplish something.  It is the 
vital energy to make choices and decisions.  It  also includes the capacity to overcome deeply 
embedded habits and to cultivat e higher, more effective ones. 
   These four factors -- security, guidance, wisd om, and power -- are interdependent.  Security and 
clear guidance bring true wisdom, and wisdom beco mes the spark or catalyst to release and direct 
power.  When these four factors are present togeth er, harmonized and enlivened by each other, they 
create the great force of a noble personality, a ba lanced character, a beautifully integrated individual. 
   These life-support factors also undergird every ot her dimension of life.  And none of them is an 
all-or-nothing matter.  The degree to which you have  developed each one could be charted somewhere 
on a continuum, much like the Maturity Continuum de scribed earlier.  At the bottom end, the four 
factors are weak.  You are basically dependent on circumstances or other people, things over which 
you have no direct control.  At the top end you are  in control.  You have independent strength and 
the foundation for rich, inte rdependent relationships. 
   Your security lies somewhere on the continuum between extreme insecurity  on one end, wherein 
your life is buffeted by all the fickle forces that pl ay upon it, and a deep sense of high intrinsic worth 
and personal security on the other end.  Your guidance ranges on the continuum from dependence on 
the social mirror or other unstable, fluctuating sources to strong inne r direction.  Your wisdom falls 
somewhere between a totally inaccurate map where ev erything is distorted and nothing seems to fit, 
and a complete and accurate map of lif e wherein all the parts and principl es are properly related to each 
other.  Your power lies somewhere between immobilization or being a puppet pulled by someone else's strings to high proactivity, the power to act according to your own values instead of being acted 
upon by other people and circumstances.    The location of these factors on the continuum, the resulting degree of their integration, harmony, 
and balance, and their positive impact on every aspect  of your life is a function of your center, the basic 
paradigms at your very core.  Alternative Centers     Each of us has a center, though we usually don' t recognize it as such.  Neither do we recognize the 
all-encompassing effects of that center on every aspect of our lives.    Let's briefly examine several centers or co re paradigms people typically have for a better 
understanding of how they affect these four fundame ntal dimensions and, ultimately, the sum of life 
that flows from them.    Spouse Centeredness.  Marriage can be the most  intimate, the most satisf ying, the most enduring, 
growth-producing of human relationships.  It might seem natural and proper to be centered on one's 
husband or wife.    But experience and observation tell a different story.  Over the years, I have been involved in 
working with many troubled marriages, and I have observed a certain thread weaving itself through 
almost every spouse-centered relationship I have encountered.  That thread is strong emotional 
dependence.    If our sense of emotional worth comes primar ily from our marriage, then we become highly 
dependent upon that relationship.  We become vuln erable to the moods and feelings, the behavior and 
treatment of our spouse, or to any external event that may impinge on the re lationship -- a new child, 
in-laws, economic setbacks, social successes, and so forth.    When responsibilities increase and stresses come in the marriage, we tend to revert to the scripts we 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
were given as we were growing up.  But so does our spouse.  And those scripts are usually different.  
Different ways of handling financial, child-discipline, or in-law issues come to the surface.  When these 
deep-seated tendencies combine with the emotional dependency in the marriage, the spouse-centered 
relationship reveals all its vulnerability.    When we are dependent on the person with wh om we are in conflict, both need and conflict are 
compounded.  Love-hate overreactions, fight-or -flight tendencies, withdrawal, aggressiveness, 
bitterness, resentment, and cold comp etition are some of the usual results.  When these occur, we tend 
to fall even further back on background tendencies an d habits in an effort to justify and defend our own 
behavior and we attack our spouse's.    I n e v i t a b l
y, anytime we are too vulnerable we feel the need to protect ourselves fr om further wounds.  
So we resort to sarcasm, cutting humor, criticis m -- anything that will keep from exposing the 
tenderness within.  Each partner te nds to wait on the initiative of the other for love, only to be 
disappointed but also confirmed as to the rightness of the accusations made.    There is only phantom security in such a relationship when all appears to be going well.  Guidance 
is based on the emotion of the moment.  Wisdom an d power are lost in the counterdependent negative 
interactions.    Family Centeredness.  Another common center is  the family.  This, too, may seem to be natural 
and proper.  As an area of focus and deep invest ment, it provides great opportunities for deep 
relationships, for loving, for sharing, for much that makes life worthwhile.  But as a center, it ironically 
destroys the very elements necessary to family success.    People who are family-centered get their sense of security or personal worth from the family 
tradition and culture or the family reputation.  Thus , they become vulnerable to any changes in that 
tradition or culture and to any influenc es that would affect that reputation. 
   Family-centered parents do not have the emotio nal freedom, the power, to raise their children with 
their ultimate welfare truly in mind.  If they derive  their own security from the family, their need to be 
popular with their children may ove rride the importance of a long-ter m investment in their children's 
growth and development.  Or they may be focused on  the proper and correct behavior of the moment.  
Any behavior that they consider improper threatens their security.  They become upset, guided by the 
emotions of the moment, spontaneously reacting to  the immediate concern rather than the long-term 
growth and development of the child.  They may ove rreact and punish out of bad temper.  They tend 
to love their children conditionally, making them  emotionally dependent or counterdependent and 
rebellious.    Money Centeredness.  Another logical and extr emely common center to people's lives is making 
money.  Economic security is basic to one's opport unity to do much in any other dimension.  In a 
hierarchy or continuum of needs, physical survival and financial security comes first.  Other needs are 
not even activated until that basic need is satisfied, at least minimally.    Most of us face economic worries.  Many fo rces in the wider culture can and do act upon our 
economic situation, causing or threatening such di sruption that we often expe rience concern and worry 
that may not always rise to the conscious surface.    Sometimes there are apparently noble reasons give n for making money, such as the desire to take 
care of one's family.  And these things are importan t.  But to focus on money-making as a center will 
bring about its own undoing.    Consider again the four life-support factors -- security, guidance, wisd om, and power.  Suppose I 
derive much of my security from my employment or from my income or net worth.  Since many 
factors affect these economic foun dations, I become anxious and uneasy, protective and defensive, 
about anything that may affect th em.  When my sense of personal worth comes from my net worth, I 
am vulnerable to anything that w ill affect that net worth.  But wo rk and money, per se, provide no 
wisdom, no guidance, and only a limited degree of power and security.  All it takes to show the 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
limitations of a money center is a crisis in my life or in the life of a loved one. 
   Money-centered people often put aside fam ily or other priorities, assuming everyone will 
understand that economic demands come first.  I know one father who was leaving with his children 
for a promised trip to the circus when a phone call came  for him to come to work instead.  He declined.  
When his wife suggested that perh aps he should have gone to work , he responded, "The work will 
come again, but childhood won't." For the rest of th eir lives his children rememb ered this little act of 
priority setting, not only as an object lesson in their minds but as an expression of love in their hearts. 
   Work Centeredness.  Work-centered people may become "workaholics," driving themselves to 
produce at the sacrifice of health, relationships,  and other important areas of their lives.  Their 
fundamental identity comes from their work -- "I'm a doctor," "I 'm a writer," "I'm an actor." 
   Because their identity and sens e of self-worth are wrapped up in their work, their security is 
vulnerable to anything that happens to prevent them  from continuing in it.  Their guidance is a 
function of the demands of the work .  Their wisdom and power come in  the limited areas of their work, 
rendering them ineffective in other areas of life.    Possession Centeredness.  A driving force of many people is possessions -- not only tangible, 
material possessions such as fashionable clothes, home s, cars, boats, and jewelry, but also the intangible 
possessions of fame, glory, or social prominence.  Most of us are aware, th rough our own experience, 
how singularly flawed such a center is, simply because it can vanish rapidly and it is influenced by so 
many forces.    If my sense of security lies in my reputation or in  the things I have, my life will be in a constant state 
of threat and jeopardy that these po ssessions may be lost or stolen or devalued.  If I'm in the presence 
of someone of greater net worth or fame or status, I f eel inferior.  If I'm in the presence of someone of 
lesser net worth or fame or status, I feel superior.  My sense of self-worth constantly fluctuates.  I 
don't have any sense of constancy or anchorage or persistent selfhood.  I am constantly trying to 
protect and insure my assets, properties, securities, position, or reputation.  We have all heard stories 
of people committing suicide after lo sing their fortunes in a significan t stock decline or their fame in a 
political reversal.    Pleasure Centeredness.  Another common center, cl osely allied with possession s, is that of fun and 
pleasure.  We live in a world where instant gratific ation is available and encouraged.  Television and 
movies are major influences in increasing people's expectations.  They graphically portray what other 
people have and can do in living the life of ease and "fun."    But while the glitter of pleasure-centered lifestyl es is graphically portrayed, the natural result of 
such lifestyles -- the impact on the inner person, on productivity, on rela tionships -- is seldom 
accurately seen.    Innocent pleasures in moderation can provide relaxation for the body and mind and can foster 
family and other relationships.  But pleasure, per se , offers no deep, lasting satisfaction or sense of 
fulfillment.  The pleasure-centered person, too s oon bored with each succ eeding level of "fun," 
constantly cries for more and more.  So the next  new pleasure has to be bigger and better, more 
exciting, with a bigger "high." A person in this state becomes almost entirely narc issistic, interpreting all 
of life in terms of the pleasure it provides to the self here and now. 
   Too many vacations that last too long, too many movies, too much TV, too much video game 
playing -- too much undisciplined leisure time in wh ich a person continually takes the course of least 
resistance -- gradually wastes a life.  It ensures th at a person's capacities stay dormant, that talents 
remain undeveloped, that the mind  and spirit become lethargic and that the heart is unfulfilled.  
Where is the security, the guidance, the wisdom, an d the power? At the low en d of the continuum, in 
the pleasure of a fleeting moment.    Malcom Muggeridge writes "A Twentieth-Century Testimony":    When I look back on my life nowadays, which I sometimes do, what strikes me most forcibly about 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
it is that what seemed at the time most signific ant and seductive, seems no w most futile and absurd.  
For instance, success in all of its various guises; be ing known and being praised; ostensible pleasures, 
like acquiring money or seducing women, or travelin g, going to and fro in the world and up and down 
in it like Satan, explaining and experi encing whatever Vanity Fair has to offer. 
   In retrospect, all these exercises in self-gratific ation seem pure fantasy, what Pascal called, "licking 
the earth."    Friend/Enemy Centeredness.  Young people are particularly, though certainly not exclusively, susceptible to becoming friend-centered.  Accept ance and belonging to a peer group can become 
almost supremely important.  The distorted and ev er-changing social mirror  becomes the source for 
the four life-support factors, creating a high degree of dependence on the fluc tuating moods, feelings, 
attitudes, and behavior of others.    Friend centeredness can also focus exclusively on  one person, taking on some of the dimensions of 
marriage.  The emotional dependence on one indivi dual, the escalating need/conflict spiral, and the 
resulting negative interactions can grow out of friend centeredness.    And what about putting an enem y at the center of one's life? Most  people would never think of it, 
and probably no one would ever do it consciously.   Nevertheless, enemy ce ntering is very common, 
particularly when there is frequent interaction be tween people who are in real conflict.  When 
someone feels he has been unjustly de alt with by an emotionally or socia lly significant person, it is very 
easy for him to become preoccupied with the injustice and make the other person the center of his life.  
Rather than proactively leading his own life, the enem y-centered person is counterdependently reacting 
to the behavior and attitudes of a perceived enemy.    One friend of mine who taught at a university became very distraught because of the weaknesses of 
a particular administrator with whom he had a nega tive relationship.  He allowed himself to think 
about the man constantly until eventually it became  a n  o b s e s s i o n .   I t  s o  p r e o c c u p i e d  h i m  t h a t  i t  
affected the quality of his relationships with his family, his church, and his working associates.  He 
finally came to the conclusion that he had to leav e the university and accept a teaching appointment 
somewhere else.    "Wouldn't you really prefer to teach at this university, if the man were not here?" I asked him. 
   "Yes, I would," he responded.  "But as long as  he is here, then my stay ing is too disruptive to 
everything in life.  I have to go.    "Why have you made this administrator  the center of your life?" I asked him. 
   He was shocked by the question.  He denied it.  But I pointed out to him that he was allowing one 
individual and his weaknesses to distort his entire ma p of life, to undermine hi s faith and the quality of 
his relationships with his loved ones.    He finally admitted that this individual had ha d such an impact on him, but he denied that he 
himself had made all these choices.  He attributed  the responsibility for the unhappy situation to the 
administrator.  He, himself, he declared, was not responsible.    As we talked, little by little, he came to realiz e that he was indeed responsible, but that because he 
did not handle this responsibility well, he was being irresponsible.    Many divorced people fall into a similar pattern.  They are still consumed with anger and bitterness 
and self-justification regarding an ex-spouse.  In  a negative sense, psychologically they are still 
married -- they each need the weaknesses of the former partner to justify their accusations. 
   Many "older" children go through life either secr etly or openly hating th eir parents.  They blame 
them for past abuses, neglect, or favoritism and they  center their adult life on that hatred, living out the 
reactive, justifying script that accompanies it.    The individual who is friend- or enemy-centered has no intrinsic security.  Feelings of self-worth 
are volatile, a function of the emotional state or be havior of other people.  Guidance comes from the 
person's perception of how others will respond, and wisdom is limited  by the social lens or by an 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
enemy-centered paranoia.  The individual has no  power.  Other people are pulling the strings. 
   Church Centeredness.  I believe that almost an yone who is seriously involved in any church will 
recognize that churchgoing is not synonymous with personal spirituality.  There are some people who 
get so busy in church worship and projects that th ey become insensitive to the pressing human needs 
that surround them, contradicting the very precepts they profess to believe deeply.  There are others 
who attend church less frequently or not at all bu t whose attitudes and behavior reflect a more genuine 
centering in the principles of the basic Judeo-Christian ethic. 
   Having participated throughout my life in or ganized church and communi ty service groups, I have 
found that attending church does not necessarily mean  living the principles taug ht in those meetings.  
You can be active in a church  but inactive in its gospel. 
   In the church-centered  life, image or appearan ce can become a person's dominant consideration, 
leading to hypocrisy that undermin es personal security and intrinsic worth.  Guidance comes from a 
social conscience, and the church-centered person tends to label ot hers artificially in terms of "active," 
"inactive," "liberal," "orthodox," or "conservative."    Because the church is a formal organization made  up of policies, programs, practices, and people, it 
cannot by itself give a person an y deep, permanent security or sense of intrinsic worth.  Living the 
principles taught by the church can do  this, but the organization alone cannot. 
   Nor can the church give a person a constant se nse of guidance.  Church-centered people often tend 
to live in compartments, acting and thinking and feel ing in certain ways on the Sabbath and in totally 
different ways on weekdays.  Such a lack of wholen ess or unity or integrity is a further threat to 
security, creating the need for incr eased labeling and self-justifying. 
   Seeing the church as an end rather than as a means to an end undermines a person's wisdom and 
sense of balance.  Although the ch urch claims to teach people about the source of power, it does not 
claim to be that power itself.  It claims to be one vehicle through which divine power can be channeled into man's nature.    Self-Centeredness.  Perhaps the most common cent er today is the self.  The most obvious form is 
selfishness, which violates the values of most people .  But if we look closely at many of the popular 
approaches to growth and self-fulfillment, we often find self-centering at their core. 
   There is little security, guidance, wisdom, or power  in the limited center of self.  Like the Dead Sea 
in Palestine, it accepts but never gives.  It becomes stagnant.    On the other hand, paying attention to the de velopment of self in the greater perspective of 
improving one's ability to serve, to produce, to contribute in meaningful ways, gives context for 
dramatic increase in the four life-support factors    These are some of the more common centers from  which people approach life.  It is often much 
easier to recognize the center in someone else's life than to see it in your own.  You probably know 
someone who puts making money ahead of everyt hing else.  You probably know someone whose 
energy is devoted to justifying his or her position in  an ongoing negative relationship.  If you look, you 
can sometimes see beyond behavior into the center that creates it. 
 Identifying Your Center     But where do you stand? What is at the center of your own life? Sometimes that isn't easy to see 
   Perhaps the best way to identify your own center is to look closely at your life-support factors.  If you can identify with one or more of the description s below, you can trace it back to the center from 
which it flows, a center which may be limiting your personal effectiveness.    If you are Spouse Centered...    S E C U R I T Y     Your feelings of security are based on the way your spouse treats you. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   You are highly vulnerable to the moods and feelings of your spouse. 
   There is deep disappointment re sulting in withdrawal or conflict when your spouse disagrees with 
you or does not meet your expectations.    Anything that may impinge on the re lationship is perceived as a threat. 
   G U I D A N C E     Your direction comes from your own needs and wants and from those of your spouse.    Your decision-making criterion is limited to what  you think is best for your marriage or your mate, 
or to the preferences and opinions of your spouse.    Your decision-making criterion is limited to what  you think is best for your marriage or your mate, 
or to the preferences and opinions of your spouse.    W I S D O M     Your life perspective surrounds things which may positively or negatively influence your spouse or 
your relationship.    P O W E R     Your power to act is limited by weaknesses in your spouse and in yourself.        *        *        *     If you are Family Centered...    S E C U R I T Y     Your security is founded on family acceptance and fulfilling family expectations.    Your sense of personal security is as volatile as the family.    Your feelings of self-worth are based on the family reputation.    G U I D A N C E     Family scripting is your source of correct attitudes and behaviors.    Your decision-making criterion is what is g ood for the family, or what family members want. 
   W I S D O M     You interpret all of life in terms of your fa mily, creating a partial understanding and family 
narcissism.    P O W E R     Your actions are limited by family models traditions.        *        *        *     If you are Money Centered...    S E C U R I T Y     Your personal worth is determined by your net worth.    You are vulnerable to anything th at threatens your economic security. 
   G U I D A N C E     Profit is your decision-making criterion.    W I S D O M     Money-making is the lens through which life  is seen and understood, creating imbalanced 
judgment.    P O W E R     You are restricted to what you can accomp lish with your money and your limited vision. 
       *        *        *     If you are Work Centered...    S E C U R I T Y     You tend to define yourse lf by your occupational role. 
   You are only comfortable when you are working.    G U I D A N C E     You make your decisions based on the needs and expectations of your work. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   W I S D O M  
   You tend to be limited to your work role.    P O W E R     Your actions are limited by work role models, or ganizational constraints, o ccupational opportunities, 
your boss's perceptions, and your possible inability at some point in your life to do that particular work. 
       *        *        *     If you are Possession Centered...    S E C U R I T Y     Your security is based on your reputation, your  social status, or the tangible things you possess. 
   You tend to compare what you have to what others have.    G U I D A N C E     You make your decisions based on what will protect, increase, or better display your possessions.    W I S D O M     You see the world in terms of comparat ive economic and social relationships. 
   P O W E R     You function within the limits of what you ca n buy or the social prominence you can achieve. 
       *        *        *     If you are Pleasure Centered...    S E C U R I T Y     You feel secure only when you're on a pleasure "high.    Your security is short-lived, anesthetiz ing, and dependent on your environment. 
   G U I D A N C E     You make your decisions based on what will give you the most pleasure. 
   W I S D O M     You see the world in term s of what's in it for you. 
   P O W E R     Your power is almost negligible.        *        *        *     If you are Friend Centered...    S E C U R I T Y     Your security is a function of the social mirror.    You are highly dependent on the opinion of others.    G U I D A N C E     Your decision-making criterion is "What will they think?    You are easily embarrassed.    W I S D O M     You see the world through a social lens.    Your actions are as fickle as opinion.    P O W E R     You are limited by your social comfort zone.        *        *        *     If you are Enemy Centered...    S E C U R I T Y     Your security is volatile, based on the movements of your enemy.    You are always wondering what he is up to.    You seek self-justification and validation from the like-minded.    G U I D A N C E     You are counter-dependently gu ided by your enemy's actions. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   You make your decisions based on what will thwart your enemy. 
   W I S D O M     Your judgment is narrow and distorted.    You are defensive, over-reactive, and often paranoid.    P O W E R     The little power you do have comes from anger, envy, resentment, and vengeance -- negative energy 
that shrivels and destroys, leaving energy for littlle else.        *        *        *     If you are Church Centered...    S E C U R I T Y     Your security is based on church activity and on the esteem in which yo u are held by those in 
authority or influence in the church.    You find identity and security in religious labels and comparisons.    G U I D A N C E     You are guided by how others will evaluate yo ur actions in the context of church teachings and 
expectations.    W I S D O M     You see the world in terms of "believers" an d "non-believers," "belongers" and "non-belongers. 
   P O W E R     Perceived power comes from your church position or role. 
       *        *        *     If you are Self-Centered...    S E C U R I T Y     Your security is constantly changing and shifting.    G U I D A N C E     Your judgment criteria are: "If it feels good..." "What I want." "What I need." "What's in it for me?    W I S D O M     You view the world by how decisions, events, or circumstances will affect you. 
   P O W E R     Your ability to act is limited to your own re sources, without the benefi ts of interdependency. 
   More often than not, a person's center is some  combination of these and/or other centers.  Most 
people are very much a function of a variety of infl uences that play upon their lives.  Depending on 
external or internal conditions, one particular cent er may be activated until the underlying needs are 
satisfied.  Then another center becomes the compelling force.    As a person fluctuates from one center to anot her, the resulting relativism is like roller coasting 
through life.  One moment you're high, the next mome nt you're low, making efforts to compensate for 
one weakness by borrowing strength from another weakne ss.  There is no consistent sense of direction, 
no persistent wisdom, no steady power supply or sense of personal, intrinsic worth and identity. 
   The ideal, of course, is to create one clear center from which you consistently derive a high degree of security, guidance, wisdom, and power, empowering your proactivity and giving congruency and 
harmony to every part of your life.  A Principle Center     By centering our lives on correct principles, we cr eate a solid foundation for development of the four 
life-support factors    Our security comes from knowing that, unlike ot her centers based on peop le or things which are 
subject to frequent and immediate change, correct pr inciples do not change.  We can depend on them 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Principles don't react to anything.  They won't divorce us or run away with our best friend.  They 
aren't out to get us.  They can't pa ve our way with shortcuts and quic k fixes.  They don't depend on 
the behavior of others, the environment, or the curre nt fad for their validity.  Principles don't die.  
They aren't here one day and gone the next.  They can't be destroyed by fire, earthquake, or theft. 
   Principles are deep, fundamental truths, cla ssic truths, generic common denominators.  They are 
tightly interwoven threads running with exactness, co nsistency, beauty, and strength through the fabric 
of life.    Even in the midst of people or circumstances that  seem to ignore the principles, we can be secure in 
the knowledge that principles are bigger than people or circumstances, and that thousands of years of 
history have seen them triumph, time and time agai n.  Even more important, we can be secure in the 
knowledge that we can validate them in our own lives, by our own experience.    Admittedly, we're not omniscient.  Our knowle dge and understanding of correct principles is 
limited by our own lack of awareness of our true nature and the world around us and by the flood of 
trendy philosophies and theories that are not in harmony with correct principles.  These ideas will 
have their season of acceptance, but, like many befo re them, they won't endure  because they're built on 
false foundations.    We are limited, but we can push back the border s of our limitations.  An understanding of the 
principle of our own growth enable s us to search out correct principl es with the conf idence that the 
more we learn, the more clearly we can focus the lens  through which we see the world.  The principles 
don't change; our understanding of them does.    The wisdom and guidance that accompany Princi ple-Centered Living come from correct maps, from 
the way things really are, have be en, and will be.  Correct maps enab le us to clearly see where we want 
to go and how to get there.  We can make our de cisions using the correct data that will make their 
implementation possible and meaningful.    The personal power that comes from Principl e-Centered Living is the power of a self-aware, 
knowledgeable, proactive individual, unrestricted by the attitudes, behaviors, and actions of others or 
by many of the circumstances and environm ental influences that limit other people. 
   The only real limitation of power is the natural consequences of the principles themselves.  We are 
free to choose our actions, based on our knowledge of correct principles, but we are not free to choose 
the consequences of those actions.  Remember, "If yo u pick up one end of the stick, you pick up the 
other.    Principles always have natural consequences a ttached to them.  There are positive consequences 
when we live in harmony with the principles.  There are negative consequences when we ignore them.  
But because these principles apply to everyone, wh ether or not they are aware, this limitation is 
universal.  And the more we know of correct princi ples, the greater is our personal freedom to act 
wisely.    By centering our lives on timeless, unchanging  principles, we create a fundamental paradigm of 
effective living.  It is the center that  puts all other centers in perspective. 
   If you are Principle Centered...    S E C U R I T Y     Your security is based on correct principles that  do not change, regardless of  external conditions or 
circumstances.    You know that true principles can repeatedly  be validated in your own life, through your own 
experiences.    As a measurement of self-improvement, correct principles function with exactness, consistency, 
beauty and strength.    Correct principles help you understand your own development, endowing you with the confidence 
to learn more, thereby increasing your knowledge and understanding. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Your source of security provides you with an  immovable, unchanging, unfailing core enabling you 
to see change as an exciting adventure and o pportunity to make significant contributions. 
   G U I D A N C E     You are guided by a compass which enables you to see where you want to go and how you will get 
there.    You use accurate data which makes your decisions both implementable and meaningful. 
   You stand apart from life's situations, and circ umstances and look at the balanced whole. Your 
decisions and actions reflect both short and long-term considerations and implications. 
   In every situation, you consciously, proactively determine the best alternative, basing decisions on 
conscience educated by principles.    W I S D O M     Your judgment encompasses a broad spectrum of long-term consequences and reflects a wise 
balance and quiet assurance.    You see things differently and thus you think an d act differently from the largely reactive world. 
   You view the world through a fundamental  paradigm for effective, provident living. 
   You see the world in terms of what you can do for the world and its people. 
   You adopt a proactive lifestyle, seeking to serve and build others.    You interpret all of life's experiences in te rms of opportunities for learning and contribution. 
   P O W E R     Your power is limited only by your unders tanding and observance of  natural law and correct 
principles and by the natural conseque nces of the principles themselves. 
   You become a self-aware, knowledgeable, proactiv e individual, largely unrestricted by the attitudes, 
behaviors, or actions of others.    Your ability to act reaches far beyond your ow n resources and encourages highly developed levels 
of interdependency.    Your decisions and actions are not driven by yo ur current financial or ci rcumstantial limitations. 
You experience an interdependent freedom.    Remember that your paradigm is the source from which your attitudes and behaviors flow.  A 
paradigm is like a pair of glasses; it affects the wa y you see everything in your life.  If you look at 
things through the paradigm of correct principles, wh at you see in life is dramatically different from 
what you see through any other centered paradigm.    I have included in the Appendix section of th is book a detailed chart wh ich shows how each center 
we've discussed might possibly affe ct the way you see everything else.  But for a quick understanding 
of the difference your center makes, let's look at ju st one example of a specific  problem as seen through 
the different paradigms.  As you read, try to put on each pair  of glasses.  Try to feel the response that 
flows from the different centers.    Suppose tonight you have invited your wife to go  to a concert.  You have the tickets; she's excited 
about going.  It's four o'clock in the afternoon.    All of a sudden, your boss calls you into his o ffice and says he needs your help through the evening 
to get ready for an important meeting at 9 A.M. tomorrow.    If you're looking through spouse-centered or fa mily-centered glasses, your main concern will be 
your wife.  You may tell the boss you can't stay and yo u take her to the concert in an effort to please 
her.  You may feel you have to stay to protect your  job, but you'll do so grudgingly, anxious about her 
response, trying to justify your decision and pr otect yourself from her disappointment or anger. 
   If you're looking through a money-centered lens , your main thought will be of the overtime you'll 
get or the influence working late will have on a pote ntial raise.  You may call your wife and simply tell 
her you have to stay, assuming she'll unders tand that economic demands come first. 
   If you're work-centered, you may be thinking of the opportunity.  You can learn more about the 
job.  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
You can make some points with the boss and further your career.  You may give yourself a pat on the 
back for putting hours well beyond what is required, evidence of what a hard worker you are.  Your wife should be proud of you!    If you're possession-centered, you might be thinki ng of the things the overtime income could buy.  
Or you might consider what an asset to your reputa tion at the office it would be if you stayed.  
Everyone would hear tomorrow how noble, how sacrificing and dedicated you are. 
   If you're pleasure-centered, you'll probably can th e work and go to the conc ert, even if your wife 
would be happy for you to work late.  You deserve a night out!    If you're friend-centered, your decision woul d be influenced by whether or not you had invited 
friends to attend the concert with you.  Or whether your friends at work were going to stay late, too.    If you're enemy-centered, you may stay late beca use you know it will give you a big edge over that 
person in the office who thinks he 's the company's greatest asset.  While he's off having fun, you'll be 
working and slaving, doing his work and yours, sacrificing your person al pleasure for the good of the 
company he can so blithely ignore.    If you're church-centered, you might be influenc ed by plans other church members have to attend 
the concert, by whether or not any church members work at your office, or by the nature of the concert 
-- Handel's Messiah might rate higher in priority than  a rock concert.  Your decision might also be 
affected by what you think a "goo d church member" would do and by  whether you view the extra work 
as "service" or "seeking after material wealth."    If you're self-centered, you'll be focused on what  will do you the most good.  Would it be better for 
you to go out for the evening? Or would it be be tter for you to make a few points with the boss? How 
the different options affect you will be your main concern.    As we consider various ways of looking at a si ngle event, is it any wonder that we have "young 
lady/old lady" perception problems in our in teractions with each other? Can you see how 
fundamentally our centers affect us? Right down to our motivations, our daily decisions, our actions (or, 
in too many cases, our reactions), our interpretati ons of events? That's wh y understanding your own 
center is so important.  And if that center does  not empower you as a proactive person, it becomes 
fundamental to your effectiveness to make the necessa ry Paradigm Shifts to create a center that will. 
   As a principle-centered person, you try to stan d apart from the emotion of the situation and from 
other factors that would act on you, and evaluate the option.  Looking at the balanced whole -- the 
work needs, the family needs, ot her needs that may be involved an d the possible implications of the 
various alternative decisions -- you'll try to come up  with the best solution, taking all factors into 
consideration.    Whether you go to the concert or stay and work is  really a small part of an effective decision.  You 
might make the same choice with a number of other centers.  But there are several important 
differences when you are coming from a principle-ce ntered paradigm.  First, you are not being acted 
upon by other people or circumstances.  You are proactively choosing what you determine to be the 
best alternative.  You make your de cisions consciously and knowledgeably. 
   Second, you know your decision is most effectiv e because it is based on pr inciples with predictable 
long-term results.    Third, what you choose to do contributes to your ultimate values in life.  Staying at work to get the 
edge on someone at the office is an entirely diffe rent evening in your life from staying because you 
value your boss's effectiveness and you genuinely wa nt to contribute to the company's welfare.  The 
experiences you have as you carry out your decision s take on quality and meaning in the context of 
your life as a whole.    Fourth, you can communicate to your wife and your boss within strong networks you've created in 
your interdependent relationships.  Because you are independent, you can be effectively 
interdependent.  You might decide to delegate what  is delegable and come in early the next morning 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
to do the rest. 
   And finally, you'll feel comfortable about your decision.  Whatever you ch oose to do, you can focus 
on it and enjoy it.    As a principle-centered person, you see things differently.  And because you see things differently, 
you think differently, you act differently.  Becaus e you have a high degree of security, guidance, 
wisdom, and power that flows from a solid, unchanging core, you ha ve the foundation of a highly 
proactive and highly effective life.  Writing and Using a A Personal Mission Statement     As we go deeply within oursel ves, as we understand and realign our basic paradigms to bring them 
in harmony with correct principles, we create both an effective, empowering center and a clear lens 
through which we can see the world.  We can then fo cus that lens on how we, as unique individuals, 
relate to that world    Frankl says we detect rather than  invent our missions in life.  I lik e that choice of words.  I think 
each of us has an internal monitor or sense, a conscience, that gives us an awareness of our own 
uniqueness and the singular contri butions that we can make.  In F rankl's words, "Everyone has his 
own specific vocation or mission in life.  Therein he cannot be replaced, nor can his life be repeated.  
Thus, everyone's task is as unique as is  his specific opportunity to implement it. 
   In seeking to give verbal expression to that  uniqueness, we are again reminded of the fundamental 
importance of proactivity and of working within ou r Circle of Influence.  To seek some abstract 
meaning to our lives out in our Circle of Concern is to abdicate our proactive responsibility, to place our 
own first creation in the hands of circumstance and other people.    Our meaning comes from within.  Again, in th e words of Frankl, "Ultimately, man should not ask 
what the meaning of his life is, but rather must recognize that it is he  who is asked.  In a word, each 
man is questioned by life; and he can only answer to life by answering for hi s own life; to life he can 
only respond by being responsible."    Personal responsibility, or proactivity, is fun damental to the first crea tion.  Returning to the 
computer metaphor, Habit 1 says "You are the prog rammer." Habit 2, then, says , "Write the program." 
Until you accept the idea that you are responsible, that you are the programmer, you won't really invest 
in writing the program.    As proactive people , we can begin to give expression to what we want to be and to do in our lives.  We can write a personal mission st atement, a personal constitution. 
   A mission statement is not so mething you write overnight.  It takes deep introspection, careful 
analysis, thoughtful expression, and often many rewrit es to produce it in final form.  It may take you 
several weeks or even months before you feel really co mfortable with it, before you feel it is a complete 
and concise expression of your innermost values and directions.  Even then, you will want to review it 
regularly and make minor changes as the years bring additional insights or changing circumstances. 
   But fundamentally, your mission statement become s your constitution, the solid expression of your 
vision and values.  It becomes the criterion by which you measure everything else in your life. 
   I recently finished reviewing my own mission stat ement, which I do fairly regularly.  Sitting on the 
edge of a beach, alone, at the end of a bicycle ride, I took out my organizer and hammered it out.  It took several hours, but I felt a sense of clarity, a sense of organization and commitment, a sense of 
exhilaration and freedom.    I find the process is as important as the produc t.  Writing or reviewing a mission statement changes 
you because it forces you to think through your prio rities deeply, carefully, an d to align your behavior 
with your beliefs.  As you do, other people begin to sense that you're not being driven by everything that happens to you.  You have a sense of mission about what you're trying to do and you are excited 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
about it. 
  Using Your Whole Brain     Our self-awareness empowers us to examine ou r own thoughts.  This is particularly helpful in 
creating a personal mission statement because the two unique human endowments that enable us to 
practice Habit 2 -- imagination and conscience -- are pr imarily functions of the right side of the brain.  
Understanding how to tap into that right brain capa city greatly increases our first-creation ability. 
   A great deal of research has been conducted for decades on what has come to be called brain 
dominance theory.  The findings basically indicated th at each hemisphere of the brain -- left and right 
-- tends to specialize in and preside over different fun ctions, process different kinds of information, and 
deal with different kinds of problems.    Essentially, the left hemisphere is the more logical/verbal one and the right hemisphere the more 
intuitive, creative one.  The left deals with word s, the right with pictures; the left with parts and 
specifics, the right with wholes and the relationship  between the parts.  The left deals with analysis, 
which means to break apart; the right with synthesis, which means to pu t together.  The left deals with 
sequential thinking; the right with simultaneous and holistic thinking.  The left is time bound; the right 
is time free.    Although people use both sides of the brain, one side or the other generally tends to be dominant in 
each individual.  Of course, the ideal would be to cultivate and develop the ability to have good 
crossover between both sides of the brain so that a person could first sense wh at the situation called for 
and then use the appropriate tool to deal with it.  Bu t people tend to stay in the "comfort zone" of their 
dominant hemisphere and process every situation accord ing to either a right- or left-brain preference. 
   In the words of Abraham Masl ow, "He that is good with a hamme r tends to think everything is a 
nail." This is another factor that affects the "young  lady/old lady" perception difference.  Right-brain 
and left-brain people tend to look  at things in different ways. 
   We live in a primarily left-brain-dominant world, where words and measurement and logic are 
enthroned, and the more creative, intuitive, sensing, ar tistic aspect of our nature is often subordinated.  
Many of us find it more difficult to tap into our right-brain capacity.    Admittedly this description is oversimplified and new studies will undoubtedly throw more light 
on brain functioning.  But the point here is that we are capable of performing many different kinds of 
thought processes and we barely tap ou r potential.  As we become aware of its different capacities, we 
can consciously use our minds to meet sp ecific needs in more effective ways. 
 Two Ways to Tap the Right Brain     If we use the brain dominance theory as a model,  it becomes evident that the quality of our first 
creation is significantly impacted by our ability to use our creative right brain.  The more we are able 
to draw upon our right-brain capacity, the more fully  we will be able to visua lize, to synthesize, to 
transcend time and present circumstances, to project a holistic picture of what we want to do and to be 
in life.  Expand Perspective     Sometimes we are knocked out of our left-brain environment and thought pa tterns and into the right 
brain by an unplanned experience.  The death of a lo ved one, a severe illness, a financial setback, or 
extreme adversity can cause us to stand back, look at  our lives, and ask ourselves some hard questions: 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
"What's really important? Why am I doing what I'm doing? 
   But if you're proactive, you don't have to wa it for circumstances or other people to create 
perspective-expanding experiences.  You can consciously create your own.    There are a number of ways to do this.  Thro ugh the powers of your imagination, you can visualize 
your own funeral, as we did at the beginning of this  chapter.  Write your own eulogy.  Actually write 
it out.  Be specific.    You can visualize your twenty-fifth and then your  fiftieth wedding anniversary.  Have your spouse 
visualize this with you.  Try to capture the essence of the family relationship you want to have created 
through your day-by-day investment over a period of that many years. 
   You can visualize your retirement from your  present occupation.  What contributions, what 
achievements will you want to have made in your field? What plans will you have after retirement? 
Will you enter a second career?    Expand your mind.  Visualize in rich detail.  Involve as many emotions an d feelings as possible.  
Involve as many of the senses as you can.    I have done similar visualization exercises with  some of my university classes.  "Assume you only 
have this one semester to live," I tell my students, "a n d  t h a t  d u r i n g  t h i s  s e m e s t e r  y o u  a r e  t o  s t a y  i n  
school as a good student.  Visualiz e how you would spend your semester. 
   Things are suddenly placed in a different perspe ctive.  Values quickly surface that before weren't 
even recognized.    I have also asked students to live with that expanded perspective for a week and keep a diary of 
their experiences.    The results are very revealing.  They start writ ing to parents to tell them how much they love and 
appreciate them.  They reconcile with a brothe r, a sister, a friend where the relationship has 
deteriorated.    The dominant, central theme of their activities, the underlying principle, is love.  The futility of 
bad-mouthing, bad thinking, put-downs, and accusa tion becomes very evident when they think in 
terms of having only a short time to live.  Princi ples and values become more evident to everybody. 
   There are a number of techniques using your imagination that can put you in touch with your 
values.  But the net effect of every one I have ever used is the same.  When people seriously 
undertake to identify what really matters most to them in their lives, what they really want to be and to 
do, they become very reverent.  They start to think in larger terms than today and tomorrow. 
 Visualization and Affirmation     Personal leadership is not a singular experience .  It doesn't begin and end with the writing of a 
personal mission statement. It is, rather, the ongoing process of keeping your vision and values before 
you and aligning your life to be congruent with thos e most important things.  And in that effort, your 
powerful right-brain capacity can be a great help to yo u on a daily basis as you work to integrate your 
personal mission statement into your life.  It's an other application of "Begin  with the End in Mind." 
   Let's go back to an example we mentioned before .  Suppose I am a parent who really deeply loves 
m y  c h i l d r e n .   S u p p o s e  I  i d e n t i f y  t h a t  a s  o n e  o f  m y  f u n d a m e n t a l  v a l u e s  i n  m y  p e r s o n a l  m i s s i o n  statement.  But suppose, on a daily basis, I have trouble overreacting.    I can use my right-brain power of visualization to write an "affirmation" that will help me become 
more congruent with my deeper values in my daily life.    A good affirmation has five basic ingredients: it's personal, it's positive, it's present tense, it's visual, 
and it's emotional.  So I might write something like  this: "It is deeply sati sfying (emotional) that I 
(personal) respond (present tense) with wisdom, lo ve, firmness, and self-control (positive) when my 
children misbehave." 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Then I can visualize it.  I can spend a few minu tes each day and totally relax my mind and body.  I 
can think about situations in which my children might misbehave.  I can visualize them in rich detail.  I can feel the texture of the chair I might be sitting on, the floor under my feet , the sweater I'm wearing.  
I can see the dress my daughter has on, the expression  on her face.  The more clearly and vividly I can 
imagine the detail, the more deeply I will experi ence it, the less I will see it as a spectator. 
   Then I can see her do something very specif ic which normally makes my heart pound and my 
temper start to flare.  But instead of seeing my no rmal response, I can see myself handle the situation 
with all the love, the power, the self-control I have  c a p t u r e d  i n  m y  a f f i r m a t i o n .   I  c a n  w r i t e  t h e  
program, write the script, in ha rmony with my values, with my  personal mission statement. 
   And if I do this, day after day my behavior will change.  Instead of living out of the scripts given to 
me by my own parents or by society or by genetics or my environment, I will be living out of the script I 
have written from my own self-selected value system.    I have helped and encouraged my son, Sean, to  use this affirmation process extensively throughout 
his football career.  We started when he played qu arterback in high school, and eventually, I taught 
him how to do it on his own.    We would try to get him in a very relaxed st ate of mind through deep breathing and progressive 
muscle relaxation technique so that he became very  quiet inside.  Then I would help him visualize 
himself right in the heat of the toughest situations imaginable. 
   He would imagine a big blitz coming at him fa st.  He had to read the blitz and respond.  He 
would imagine giving audibles at the line after read ing defenses.  He would imagine quick reads with 
his first receiver, his second receiver, his third rece iver.  He would imagine options that he normally 
wouldn't do.    At one point in his football career, he told me he was constantly getting uptight.  As we talked, I 
realized that he was visualizing uptightness.  So we worked on visualizing relaxation in the middle of 
the big pressure circumstance.  We discovered that th e nature of the visualizat ion is very important.  
If you visualize the wrong thing, you'll produce the wrong thing.    Dr. Charles Garfield has done extensive researc h on peak performers, both in athletics and in 
business.  He became fascinated with peak pe rformance in his work with the NASA program, 
watching the astronauts rehearse everything on e arth again and again in a simulated environment 
before they went to space.  Although he had a doctor ate in mathematics, he decided to go back and get 
another Ph.D. in the field of psychology and study the characteristics of peak performers. 
   One of the main things his research showed was th at almost all of the worl d-class athletes and other 
peak performers are visualizers.  They see it; they feel  it; they experience it before they actually do it.  
They Begin with the End in Mind.    You can do it in every area of your life.  Be fore a performance, a sales presentation, a difficult 
confrontation, or the daily challenge of meeting a goal, see it clearly, vividly, re lentlessly, over and over 
again.  Create an internal "comfort zone." Then, when  you get into the situation, it isn't foreign.  It 
doesn't scare you.    Your creative, visual right brain is one of your most important assets, both in creating your personal 
mission statement and in integrating it into your life.    There is an entire body of literature and audi o and video tapes that deals with this process of 
visualization and affirmation.  Some of the more rece nt developments in this field include such things 
as subliminal programming, neurolinguistic program ming, and new forms of relaxation and self-talk 
processes.  These all involve explanation, elabo ration, and different packaging of the fundamental 
principles of the first creation.    My review of the success literature brought me in contact with hundreds of books on this subject.  
Although some made extravagant claims and relied on  anecdotal rather than sci entific evidence, I think 
that most of the material is fundamentally sound.  The majority of it appears to have originally come 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
out of the study of the Bible by many individuals. 
   In effective personal leadership, visualization and affirmation techniques emerge naturally out of a 
foundation of well thought through purposes and princi ples that become the center of a person's life.  
They are extremely powerful in rescripting and reprogramming, into writing deeply committed-to 
purposes and principles into one's heart and mind.  I believe that central to all enduring religions in 
society are the same principles and practices clot hed in different language  -- meditation, prayer, 
covenants, ordinances, scripture study, empathy, co mpassion, and many differ ent forms of the use of 
both conscience and imagination.    But if these techniques become part of the pers onality ethic and are severe d from a base of character 
and principles, they can be misused and abused in serving other centers, primarily the self center. 
   Affirmation and visualization are forms of pr ogramming, and we must be certain that we do not 
submit ourselves to any programming that is not in harmony with our basic cent er or that comes from 
sources centered on money-making, self interest , or anything other than correct principles. 
   The imagination can be used to achieve the fleet ing success that comes when a person is focused on 
material gain or on "what's in it for me." But I belie ve the higher use of imagin ation is in harmony with 
the use of conscience to transcend self and create a life of contribution based on unique purpose and on 
the principles that govern interdependent reality.  Identifying Roles and Goals     Of course, the logical/verbal left brain become s important also as you attempt to capture your 
right-brain images, feelings, and pictures in the words of a written mission statement.  Just as 
breathing exercises help integrate body and mind, wr iting is a kind of psycho-neural muscular activity 
which helps bridge and integrate the conscious and subconscious minds.  Writing distills, crystallizes, 
and clarifies thought and helps break the whole into parts.    We each have a number of different roles in ou r lives -- different areas or capacities in which we 
have responsibility.  I may, for example, have a role as an individual, a husband, a father, a teacher, a church member, and a businessman.  An d each of these roles is important. 
   One of the major problems that arises when people work to become more effective in life is that they 
don't think broadly enough.  They lose the sense of proportion, the balance, the natural ecology 
necessary to effective living.  They may get consum ed by work and neglect personal health.  In the 
name of professional success, they may neglect th e most precious relationships in their lives. 
   You may find that your mission statement will be much more balanced, much easier to work with, if 
you break it down into the specific role areas of yo ur life and the goals you wa nt to accomplish in each 
area.  Look at your professional role.  You might be a salesperson, or a manager, or a product developer.  What are you about in th at area? What are the values that should guide you? Think of your 
personal roles -- husband, wife, father, mother, neig hbor, friend.  What are you about in those roles? 
What's important to you? Think of community role s -- the political area, public service, volunteer 
organizations.    One executive has used the idea of roles and goals to create the follo wing mission statement: 
   My mission is to live with integrity an d to make a difference in the lives of others. 
   To fulfill this mission:    I have charity: I seek out and love the one -- each one -- regardless of his situation. 
   I sacrifice: I devote my time, talents, and resources to my mission.    I inspire: I teach by example that we are all children of a loving  Heavenly Father and that every 
Goliath can be overcome.    I am impactful: What I do makes a difference in the lives of others. 
   These roles take priority in achieving my mission: 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Husband -- my partner is the most important pers on in my life.  Together we contribute the fruits 
of harmony, industry, charity, and thrift.    Father -- I help my children experience progressively greater joy in their lives.    Son/Brother -- I am frequently "there" for support and love.    Christian -- God can count on me to keep my covenants and to serve his other children. 
   Neighbor -- The love of Christ is visible through my actions toward others. 
   Change Agent -- I am a catalyst for develo ping high performance in large organizations. 
   Scholar -- I learn important new things every day.    Writing your mission in terms of the important roles in your life gives yo u balance and harmony.  
It keeps each role clearly before you.  You can revi ew your roles frequently to make sure that you don't 
get totally absorbed by one role to the exclusion of others that are equally or  even more important in 
your life.    After you identify your various roles, then yo u can think about the Long Term Goals are plans you 
make that support the principles described in your  Mission Statement.  These goals should represent 
areas you want to focus on in the near future.  Typi cally, Long Term Goals take  longer than a week to 
complete, but are most specific than the lifetime go als of your Mission Statement.long-term goals you 
want to accomplish in each of those roles.  We'r e into the right brain ag ain, using imagination, 
creativity, conscience, and inspiratio n.  If these goals are the extensio n of a mission statement based on 
correct principles, they will be vitally different from  the goals people normally set.  They will be in 
harmony with correct principles, with natural laws , which gives you greater power to achieve them.  
They are not someone else's goals yo u have absorbed.  They are your go als.  They reflect your deepest 
values, your unique talent, your sense of mission.  And they grow out of your chosen roles in life. 
   An effective goal focuses primarily on results rat her than activity.  It identifies where you want to 
be, and, in the process, helps you determine wher e you are.  It gives you important information on 
how to get there, and it tells you when you have arrive d.  It unifies your efforts and energy.  It gives 
meaning and purpose to all you do.  And it can finally translate itself into daily  activities so that you 
are proactive, you are in charge of your life, you are  making happen each day the things that will enable 
you to fulfill your personal mission statement.    Roles and goals give structure and organized dire ction to your personal mi ssion.  If you don't yet 
have a personal mission statement, it's a good place to begin.  Just identifying the various areas of your 
life and the two or three important results you feel you should accomplish in each area to move ahead 
gives you an overall perspective of your life and a sense of direction.    As we move into Habit 3, we'll go into greater de pth in the area of short-term goals.  The important 
application at this point is to iden tify roles and long-term goals as they  relate to your personal mission 
statement.  These roles and long-term goals will prov ide the foundation for effective goal setting and 
achieving when we get to the Habit 3 day-to-day management of life and time.  Family Mission Statements     Because Habit 2 is based on principle, it has broa d application.  In addition to individuals, families, 
service groups, and organizations of all kinds become significantly more effective as they Begin with the 
End in Mind.    Many families are managed on the basis of crises , moods, quick fixes, and instant gratification -- not 
on sound principles.  Symptoms surface whenever st ress and pressure mount: people become cynical, 
critical, or silent or they start yelling and overre acting.  Children who observe these kinds of behavior 
grow up thinking the only way to solve problems is flight or fight.    The core of any family is what is changeless, what is always going to be there -- shared vision and 
values.  By writing a family mission statement,  you give expression to its true foundation. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   This mission statement becomes its constituti on, the standard, the crit erion for evaluation and 
decision making.  It gives continuity and unity to th e family as well as direction.  When individual 
values are harmonized with those of the family, members work togeth er for common purposes that are 
deeply felt.    Again, the process is as important as the prod uct.  The very process of writing and refining a 
mission statement becomes a key way to improve the family.  Working together to create a mission 
statement builds the PC capacity to live it.    By getting input from every family member, draf ting a statement, getting feedback, revising it, and 
using wording from different family members, you get the family talking, communicating, on things 
that really matter deeply.  The best mission stat ements are the result of family members coming 
together in a spirit of mutual re spect, expressing their different vi ews, and working together to create 
something greater than any one indi vidual could do alone.  Periodic review to  expand perspective, 
shift emphasis or direction, amend or give new meaning to time-worn phrases can keep the family 
united in common values and purposes.    The mission statement becomes the framework fo r thinking, for governing the family.  When the 
problems and crises come, the constitution is there to remind family members of the things that matter 
most and to provide direction for problem solving and decision making base d on correct principles. 
   In our home, we put our mission statement up on a wall in the family room so that we can look at it 
and monitor ourselves daily.  When we read the phras es about the sounds of love in our home, order, 
responsible independence, cooperation, helpfulness,  meeting needs, develo ping talents, showing 
interest in each other's talents, and giving service to  others it gives us some criteria to know how we're 
doing in the things that matter most to us as a family.    When we plan our family goals and activities, we sa y, "In light of these prin ciples, what are the goals 
we're going to work on? What are our action plans to accomplish our goals and actualize these values?" 
   We review the statement frequently and rework  goals and jobs twice a year, in September and June 
-- the beginning of school and the end of school -- to reflect the situation as it is, to improve it, to 
strengthen it.  It renews us, it recommits us to what we believe in, what we stand for. 
 Organizational Mission Statements     Mission statements are also vital to successful organizations.  One of the most important thrusts of 
my work with organizations is to assist them in developing effective mission statements.  And to be 
effective, that statement has to come from within  the bowels of the organization.  Everyone should 
participate in a meaningful way -- not just the top strategy planners, but everyone.  Once again, the 
involvement process is as important as the written product and is the key to its use. 
   I am always intrigued whenever I go to IBM an d watch the training process there.  Time and time 
again, I see the leadership of the organization come  into a group and say th at IBM stands for three 
things: the dignity of the indivi dual, excellence, and service. 
   These things represent the belief system of IBM.   Everything else will change, but these three things 
will not change.  Almost like osmosis, this belief syst em has spread throughout the entire organization, 
providing a tremendous base of shared values and personal security for everyone who works there. 
   Once I was training a group of people for IBM in New York.  It was small group, about 20 people, 
and one of them became ill.  He called his wife in  California, who expressed concern because his illness 
required a special treatment.  The IBM people resp onsible for the training session arranged to have 
him taken to an excellent hospital with medical specia lists in the disease.  But they could sense that his 
wife was uncertain and really wanted him home where their personal physician could handle the 
problem.    So they decided to get him home.  Concerned ab out the time involved in driving him to the airport 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
and waiting for a commercial plane, they brought in a helicopter, flew him to the airport, and hired a 
special plane just to take this man to California.    I don't know what costs that involved; my gu ess would be many thousands of dollars.  But IBM 
believes in the dignity of the indivi dual.  That's what the company stan ds for.  To those present, that 
experience represented its belief system and was no surprise.  I was impressed.    At another time, I was scheduled to train 175 sho pping center managers at a particular hotel.  I was 
amazed at the level of service there.  It wasn't a cosmetic thing.  It was evident at all levels, 
spontaneously, without supervision.    I arrived quite late, checked in, and asked if room  service were available.  The man at the desk said, 
"No, Mr. Covey, but if you're interested, I could go back and get a sandwich or a salad or whatever 
you'd like that we have in the kitchen." His attitu de was one of total concern about my comfort and 
welfare.  "Would you like to see your convention room?" he continued.  "Do you have everything you need? What can I do for you? I'm here to serve you."    There was no supervisor there checking up.  This man was sincere.    The next day I was in the mi ddle of a presentation when I disco vered that I didn't have all the 
colored markers I needed.  So I went out into th e hall during the brief break and found a bellboy 
running to another convention.  "I've got a problem," I said.  "I'm here training a group of managers 
and I only have a short break.  I need some more colored pens.    He whipped around and almost came to attent ion.  He glanced at my name tag and said, "Mr. 
Covey, I will solve your problem."    He didn't say, "I don't know where to go" or "we ll, go and check the front desk ." He just took care of 
it.  And he made me feel like it was his privilege to do so.    Later, I was in the side lobby, looking at some of the art objects.   Someone from the hotel came up 
to me and said, "Mr. Covey, would yo u like to see a book that describes  the art objects in this hotel?" 
How anticipatory! How service-oriented!    I next observed one of the employees high up on a ladder cleaning windows in the lobby.  From his 
vantage point he saw a woman having a little difficulty in the garden with a walk er.  She hadn't really 
fallen, and she was with other people.  But he cl imbed down that ladder, went outside, helped the 
woman into the lobby and saw that she was properly taken care of.  Then he went back and finished 
cleaning the windows.    I wanted to find out how this organization had cr eated a culture where people bought so deeply into 
the value of customer service.  I interviewed housekeepers, waitre sses, bellboys in that hotel and 
found that this attitude had impregnated the mind s, hearts, and attitudes of every employee there. 
   I went through the back door into the kitche n, where I saw the central value: "Uncompromising 
personalized service." I finally we nt to the manager and said, "My business is helping organizations 
develop a powerful team character, a team cultur e.  I am amazed at what you have here." 
   "Do you want to know the real key?" he inquir ed.  He pulled out the mission statement for the hotel 
chain.    After reading it, I acknowledged, "That's an im pressive statement.  But I know many companies 
that have impressive mission statements."    "Do you want to see the one for this hotel?" he asked.    "Do you mean you developed one just for this hotel?"    " Y e s . "     "Different from the one for the hotel chain?"    "Yes.  It's in harmony with that statement, but this one pertains to our situation, our environment, 
our time." He handed me another paper.    "Who developed this mission statement?" I asked.    "Everybody," he replied. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   "Everybody? Really, everybody?" 
   " Y e s . "     "Housekeepers?"    " Y e s . "     "Waitresses?"    " Y e s . "     "Desk clerks?"    "Yes.  Do you want to see the mission statemen t written by the people who greeted you last night?" 
He pulled out a mission statement that they, themselv es, had written that was interwoven with all the 
other mission statements.  Everyone, at every level, was involved.    The mission statement for that hotel was the hub of a great wheel.  It spawned the thoughtful, more 
specialized mission statements of particular groups of employees.  It was used as the criterion for 
every decision that was made.  It clarified what those people stood for -- how they related to the 
customer, how they related to each other.  It affect ed the style of the manage rs and the leaders.  It 
affected the compensation system.  It affected the kind of people they recruited and how they trained 
and developed them.  Every aspect of  that organization, essentially, wa s a function of that hub, that 
mission statement.    I later visited another hotel in the same chain, and the first thing I did when  I checked in was to ask 
to see their mission statement, whic h they promptly gave me.  At this  hotel, I came to understand the 
motto "Uncompromising personalized service" a little more.    For a three-day period, I watched every conc eivable situation where service was called for.  I 
always found that service was delivered in a very im pressive, excellent way.  But it was always also 
very personalized.  For instance, in the swimmi ng area I asked the attendant where the drinking 
fountain was.  He walked me to it.    But the thing that impressed me the very most was to see an employee, on his own, admit a mistake 
to his boss.  We ordered room service, and were told  when it would be delivered to the room.  On the 
way to our room, the room service person spilled the hot chocolate, and it took  a few extra minutes to 
go back and change the linen on the tray and replac e the drink.  So the room service was about fifteen 
minutes late, which was really not that important to us.    Nevertheless, the next morning the room service manager phoned us to apologize and invited us to 
have either the buffet breakfast or a room service br eakfast, compliments of th e hotel, to in some way 
compensate for the inconvenience.    What does it say about the culture of an orga nization when an employee admits his own mistake, 
unknown to anyone else, to the manager so that  customer or guest is better taken care of! 
   As I told the manager of the first hotel I visite d, I know a lot of companies with impressive mission 
statements.  But there is a real difference, all the difference in the world, in the effectiveness of a 
mission statement created by everyone involved in the organization and one written by a few top 
executives behind a mahogany wall.    One of the fundamental problems in organizat ions, including families, is that people are not 
committed to the determinations of other people fo r their lives.  They simply don't buy into them. 
   Many times as I work with organizations, I find  people whose goals are totally different from the 
goals of the enterprise.  I commonly find reward systems completely out of alignment with stated 
value systems.    When I begin work with companies that have al ready developed some kind of mission statement, I 
ask them, "How many of the people here know that  you have a mission statement? How many of you 
know what it contains? How many were involved in cr eating it? How many really buy into it and use it 
as your frame of reference in making decisions?"    Without involvement, there is no commitment.  M ark it down, asterisk it, circle it, underline it.