T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
Part One 
Paradigms and Principles 
 
INSIDE-OUT 
 
   There is no real excellence in all this wo rld which can be separated from right living 
   -- David Starr Jordan 
*  *  * 
   In more than 25 years of working with people  in business, university, and marriage and family 
settings, I have come in contact with many indivi duals who have achieved an incredible degree of 
outward success, but have found themselves struggling with an inner hunger, a deep need for personal 
congruency and effectiveness and for healthy,  growing relationships with other people. 
   I suspect some of the problems they ha ve shared with me may be familiar to you. 
   I've set and met my career goals and I'm having tremendous professional success.  But it's cost me 
my personal and family life.  I don't know my wife  and children anymore.  I'm not even sure I know 
myself and what's really important to me.  I've had to ask myself -- is it worth it? 
   I've started a new diet -- for the fifth time this year.  I know I' m overweight, and I really want to 
change.  I read all the new information, I set goals, I get myself all psyched up with a positive mental 
attitude and tell myself I can do it.  But I don't.  Af ter a few weeks, I fizzle.  I just can't seem to keep a 
promise I make to myself.    I've taken course after course on effective mana gement training.  I expect a lot out of my employees 
and I work hard to be friendly tow ard them and to treat them right.  But I don't feel any loyalty from 
them.  I think if I were home sick for a day, they 'd spend most of their ti me gabbing at the water 
fountain.  Why can't I train them to be independen t and responsible -- or find employees who can be? 
   My teenage son is rebellious and on drugs.  No matter what I try, he won't listen to me.  What can 
I do?    There's so much to do.  And there's never enough  time.  I feel pressured and hassled all day, every 
day, seven days a week.  I've attended time manageme nt seminars and I've tried half a dozen different 
planning systems.  They've helped some, but I still don't feel I'm living the happy, productive, peaceful 
life I want to live.    I want to teach my children the value of work.  But to get them to do anything, I have to supervise 
every move;  and put up with complaining every step of the way.  It's so much easier to do it myself.  
Why can't children do their work ch eerfully and without being reminded? 
   I'm busy -- really busy.  But sometimes I wonder  if what I'm doing will make a difference in the 
long run.  I'd really like to think there was mean ing in my life, that some how things were different 
because I was here.    I see my friends or relatives achieve some degree  of success or receive some  recognition, and I smile 
and congratulate them enthusiastically.  But inside, I' m eating my heart out.  Why do I feel this way? 
   I have a forceful personality.  I know, in almost  any interaction, I can control the outcome.  Most of 
the time, I can even do it by influencing others to come up with the solution I want.  I think through 
each situation and I really feel the ideas I come up with are usually the best for everyone.  But I feel 
uneasy.  I always wonder what other peop le really think of me and my ideas. 
    My marriage has gone flat.  We don't fight or anything; we just don't lo ve each other anymore.  
We've gone to counseling; we've tried a number of th ings, but we just can't seem to rekindle the feeling 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
we used to have. 
   These are deep problems, painful problems -- problems that quick fix approaches can't solve.    A few years ago, my wife Sandra and I were strugg ling with this kind of concern.  One of our sons 
was having a very difficult time in school.  He wa s doing poorly academically; he didn't even know 
how to follow the instructions on the tests, let alon e do well in them.  Socially he was immature, often 
embarrassing those closest to him.  Athletically, he  was small, skinny, and uncoordinated -- swinging 
his baseball bat, for example, almost before the ba ll was even pitched.  Others would laugh at him. 
    Sandra and I were consumed with a desire to help him.  We felt th at if "success" were important in 
any area of life, it was supremely im portant in our role as parents.  So we worked on our attitudes and 
behavior toward him and we tried to work on his.  We attempted to psyche him up using positive 
mental attitude techniques.  "Come on, son! You can do it! We know you can.  Put your hands a little 
higher on the bat and keep your eye on the ball.  Don' t swing till it gets close to you." And if he did a 
little better, we would go to great lengths to rein force him.  "That's good, son, keep it up." 
   When others laughed, we reprimanded them.  "L eave him alone.  Get off his back.  He's just 
learning." And our son would cry and insist that he'd never be any good and that he didn't like baseball 
anyway.    Nothing we did seemed to help, and we were rea lly worried.  We could see the effect this was 
having on his self-esteem.  We tried to be encou raging and helpful and positive, but after repeated 
failure, we finally drew back and tried to lo ok at the situation on a different level. 
   At this time in my professional role I was in volved in leadership development work with various 
clients throughout the country.  In that capacity I was preparing bimonthly pr ograms on the subject of 
communication and perception for IBM's Ex ecutive Development Program participants. 
   As I researched and prepared these presentati ons, I became particul arly interested in how 
perceptions are formed, how they behave.  This led me to a study of expectancy theory and 
self-fulfilling prophecies or the "Pygmalion effect,"  and to a realization of how deeply imbedded our 
perceptions are.  It taught me that we must look at  the lens through which we see the world, as well as 
at the world we see, and that the lens it self shapes how we interpret the world. 
   As Sandra and I talked about the concepts I wa s teaching at IBM and ab out our own situation, we 
began to realize that what we were doing to help our son was not in harmony with the way we really 
saw him.  When we honestly examined our deepest f eelings, we realized that our perception was that 
he was basically inadequate, somehow "behind." No matter how much we worked on our attitude and 
behavior, our efforts were ineffective because, de spite our actions and our words, what we really 
communicated to him was, "You aren't capable.  You have to be protected."    We began to realize that if we wanted to change  the situation, we first had to change ourselves.  
And to change ourselves effectively, we first had to change our perceptions. 
 The Personality and Character Ethics     At the same time, in addition to my research on perception, I was also deeply immersed in an 
in-depth study of the success literature published in  the United States sinc e 1776.  I was reading or 
scanning literally hundreds of books, articles, and es says in fields such as self-improvement, popular 
psychology, and self-help.  At my fingertips was the sum and substance of what a free and democratic 
people considered to be the keys to successful living.     As my study took me back through 200 years of  writing about success, I noticed a startling pattern 
emerging in the content of the literature.  Because of our own pain, and because of similar pain I had 
seen in the lives and relationships of many people I had worked with through the years, I began to feel 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
more and more that much of the su ccess literature of the past 50 years  was superficial.  It was filled 
with social image consciousness, techniques and quic k fixes -- with social band-aids and aspirin that 
addressed acute problems and sometimes even appe ared to solve them temporarily -- but left the 
underlying chronic problems untouched to  fester and resurface time and again. 
   In stark contrast, almost all the literature in th e first 150 years or so focused on what could be called 
the character ethic as the foundation of success -- th ings like integrity, humility, fidelity, temperance, 
courage, justice, patience, industry, simplicity, mo desty, and the Golden Rule.  Benjamin Franklin's 
autobiography is representative of that literature.  It is, basically, the story of one man's effort to 
integrate certain principles and habits deep within his nature. 
   The character ethic taught that there are basic prin ciples of effective living, and that people can only 
experience true success and enduring happiness as th ey learn and integrate thes e principles into their 
basic character.    But shortly after World War I the basic view of success shifted from the ch aracter ethic to what we 
might call the personality ethic.  Su ccess became more a function of pe rsonality, of public image, of 
attitudes and behaviors, skills and techniques, that lubricate the processes of human interaction.  This 
personality ethic essentially took two paths: one was human and public rela tions techniques, and the 
other was positive mental attitude (PMA).  Some of this philosophy was expressed in inspiring and 
sometimes valid maxims such as "Y our attitude determines your alti tude," "Smiling wins more friends 
than frowning," and "Whatever the mind of ma n can conceive and believe it can achieve. 
   Other parts of the personality approach were clearly manipulative, even deceptive, encouraging 
people to use techniques to get other people to like th em, or to fake interest in the hobbies of others to 
get out of them what they wanted, or to use the "po wer look," or to intimidate their way through life. 
   Some of this literature acknowledged characte r as an ingredient of success, but tended to 
compartmentalize it rather than reco gnize it as foundational and catalytic.  Reference to the character 
ethic became mostly lip service; the basic thrust was quick-fix influence techniques, power strategies, 
communication skills, and positive attitudes.    This personality ethic, I began to realize, wa s the subconscious source of  the solutions Sandra and I 
were attempting to use with our son.  As I thou ght more deeply about the difference between the 
personality and character ethics, I realized that Sand ra and I had been getting social mileage out of our 
children's good behavior, and, in our eyes, this son simply didn't measure up.  Our image of ourselves, 
and our role as good, caring parents was even deeper  than our image of our son and perhaps influenced 
it.  There was a lot more wrapped up in the wa y we were seeing and handlin g the problem than our 
concern for our son's welfare.    As Sandra and I talked, we became painfully aw are of the powerful influence of our character and 
motives and of our perception of him.  We knew that social comparison mo tives were out of harmony 
with our deeper values and could lead to conditiona l love and eventually to our son's lessened sense of 
self-worth.  So we determined to focus our efforts on us -- not on our techniques, but on our deepest 
motives and our perception of him.  Instead of tr ying to change him, we tried to stand apart -- to 
separate us from him -- and to sense his iden tity, individuality, separateness, and worth. 
   Through deep thought and the ex ercise of faith and prayer, we bega n to see our son in terms of his 
own uniqueness.  We saw within him layers and layers  of potential that would be realized at his own 
pace and speed.  We decided to relax and get out of  his way and let his own personality emerge.  We 
saw our natural role as being to affirm, enjoy, and value him.  We also conscientiously worked on our 
motives and cultivated internal sources of secu rity so that our own feelings of worth were not 
dependent on our children's "acceptable" behavior.    As we loosened up our old perception of our son and developed value-based motives, new feelings 
began to emerge.  We found ourselves enjoying him instead of comparing or judging him.  We 
stopped trying to clone him in our own image or  measure him against social expectations.  We 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
stopped trying to kindly, positively manipulate him into an acceptable social mold.  Because we saw 
him as fundamentally adequate and able to cope with life, we stopped protecting him against the 
ridicule of others.    He had been nurtured on this protection, so  he went through some withdrawal pains, which he 
expressed and which we accepted, but did not necessar ily respond to.  "We don't need to protect you," 
was the unspoken message.  "You're fundamentally okay."    As the weeks and months passed, he began to f eel a quiet confidence and affirmed himself.  He 
began to blossom, at his own pace and speed.  He be came outstanding as measured by standard social 
criteria -- academically, socially and athletically -- at a rapid clip, far beyond the so-called natural 
developmental process.  As the years passed, he was elected to several student body leadership 
positions, developed into an all-state athlete and st arted bringing home straight A report cards.  He 
developed an engaging and guileless personality that has enabled him to relate in nonthreatening ways 
to all kinds of people.    Sandra and I believe that our son's "soc ially impressive" accomplishments were more a 
serendipitous expression of the fee lings he had about himself than mere ly a response to social reward.  
This was an amazing experience for Sandra and me, and a very instructional one in dealing with our 
other children and in other roles as  well.  It brought to our awareness on a very personal level the vital 
difference between the personality et hic and the character ethic of succ ess.  The Psalmist expressed our 
conviction well: "Search your own heart with all di ligence for out of it flow the issues of life." 
 Primary and Secondary Greatness     M y  e x p e r i e n c e  w i t h  m y  s o n ,  m y  s t u d y  o f  p e rception and my reading of the success literature 
coalesced to create one of those "Aha!" experiences in  life when suddenly things click into place.  I was 
suddenly able to see the powerful impact of the person ality ethic and to clearly understand those subtle, 
often consciously unidentified discrep ancies between what I knew to be true -- some things I had been 
taught many years ago as a child and things that were deep in my own inner sense of value -- and the 
quick fix philosophies that surrounded me every day.  I understood at a deeper level why, as I had 
worked through the years with people from all walks of life, I had found that the things I was teaching 
and knew to be effective were often at variance with these popular voices.    I am not suggesting that elements of the pers onality ethic -- personality growth, communication skill 
training, and education in the field of influence strat egies and positive thinking -- are not beneficial, in 
fact sometimes essential for success.  I believe they  are.  But these are secondary, not primary traits.  
Perhaps, in utilizing our human capacity to build on the foundation of generations before us, we have 
inadvertently become so focused on  our own building that we have forgotten the foundation that holds 
it up; or in reaping for so long where we have no t sown, perhaps we have forgotten the need to sow. 
   If I try to use human influence strategies and tactics of how to get other people to do what I want, to work better, to be more motivated, to like me and each other -- while my character is fundamentally 
flawed, marked by duplicity and insincerity -- then , in the long run, I cannot be successful.  My 
duplicity will breed distrust, and everything I do  -- even using so-called good human relations 
techniques -- will be perceived as manipulative.  It  simply makes no difference how good the rhetoric 
is or even how good the intentions are; if there is little or no trust, there is no foundation for permanent 
success.  Only basic goodness gives life to technique.    To focus on technique is like cramming your  way through school.  You sometimes get by, perhaps 
even get good grades, but if you don't pay the price day in and day out, you never achieve true mastery 
of the subjects you study or develop an educated mind.    Did you ever consider how ridiculous it would be to  try to cram on a farm -- to forget to plant in the 
spring, play all summer and then cram in the fall to br ing in the harvest? The f arm is a natural system.  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
The price must be paid and the process followed.  You always reap what you sow; there is no shortcut. 
   This principle is also true, ultimately, in huma n behavior, in human relationships.  They, too, are 
natural systems based on the The Law of the Harvest. In the short run, in an artifi cial social system such 
as school, you may be able to get by if you learn ho w to manipulate the man-made rules, to "play the 
game." In most one-shot or short-lived human intera ctions, you can use the personality ethic to get by 
and to make favorable impressions through charm an d skill and pretending to be interested in other 
people's hobbies.  You can pick up quick, easy tech niques that may work in short-term situations.  
But secondary traits alone have no permanent worth in long-term relationships.  Eventually, if there 
isn't deep integrity and fundamental character strength , the challenges of life w ill cause true motives to 
surface and human relationship failu re will replace short-term success. 
   Many people with secondary greatness -- that is , social recognition for their talents -- lack primary 
greatness or goodness in their character.  Sooner or later, you'll see this in every long-term relationship 
they have, whether it is with a business associate, a spouse, a friend, or a teenage child going through 
an identity crisis.  It is character that communicate s most eloquently.  As Em erson once put it, "What 
you are shouts so loudly in my ears that I cannot hear what you say."    There are, of course, situations where people have character strength but they lack communication 
skills, and that undoubtedly affects the quality of relationships as well.  But the effects are still 
secondary.    In the last analysis, what we are communicate s far more eloquently than anything we say or do.  
We all know it.  There are people we trust abso lutely because we know their character.  Whether 
they're eloquent or not, whether they have the human relations tec hniques or not, we trust them, and 
we work successfully with them.    In the words of William George Jordan, "Into th e hands of every individual is given a marvelous 
power for good or evil -- the silent unconscious, un seen influence of his life.  This is simply the 
constant radiation of what man really  is, not what he pretends to be." 
 The Power of a Paradigm     The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People em body many of the fundamental principles of human 
effectiveness.  These habits are basic; they are pr imary.  They represent the internalization of correct 
principles upon which enduring happiness and success are based. 
   But before we can really understand these Seven Habits TM, we need to understand our own 
"paradigms" and how to make a "A Paradigm Shift TM."    Both the The Character Ethic The Personality Ethi c are examples of social paradigms.  The word 
paradigm comes from the Greek.  It was originally a scientific term, and is more commonly used today 
to mean a model, theory, perception, assumption, or fr ame of reference.  In the more general sense, it's 
the way we "see" the world -- not in terms of our vi sual sense of sight, but in terms of perceiving, 
understanding, and interpreting.     For our purposes, a simple way to understand para digms is to see them as maps.  We all know that 
"the map is not the territory." A map is simply an e xplanation of certain aspects of the territory.  That's 
exactly what a paradigm is.  It is a theory, an explanation, or model of something else. 
   Suppose you wanted to arrive at a specific locati on in central Chicago.  A street map of the city 
would be a great help to you in reaching your destination.  But suppose you were given the wrong 
map.  Through a printing error, the map labeled "Chicago" was actually a map of Detroit.  Can you imagine the frustration, the ineffectivene ss of trying to reach your destination? 
   You might work on your behavior -- you could try harder, be more diligent, double your speed.  
But your efforts would only succeed in getting you to the wrong place faster. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
 
   You might work on your attitude -- you could th ink more positively.  You still wouldn't get to the 
right place, but perhaps you wouldn't care.  Your  attitude would be so positive, you'd be happy 
wherever you were.    The point is, you'd still be lost.  The fundamental  problem has nothing to do with your behavior or 
your attitude.  It has everything to do with having a wrong map. 
   If you have the right map of Chicago, then diligence becomes important, and when you encounter 
frustrating obstacles along the way, then attitude ca n make a real difference.  But the first and most 
important requirement is the accuracy of the map.    Each of us has many, many maps in our head, which can be divided into two main categories: maps 
of the way things are, or realities, and maps of th e way things should be, or values.  We interpret 
everything we experience through these mental maps .  We seldom question  their accuracy; we're 
usually even unaware that we have them.  We simp ly assume that the way we see things is the way 
they really are or the way they should be.    And our attitudes and behaviors grow out of those assumptions.  The way we see things is the 
source of the way we think and the way we act.    Before going any further, I invite you to have an intellectual and emotional experience.  Take a few 
seconds and just look at the picture on the following page    Now look at the picture below and carefully describe what you see    Do you see a woman? How old would you say she is? What does she look like? What is she wearing? 
In what kind of roles do you see her?    You probably would describe the woman in the second picture to be about 25 years old -- very 
lovely, rather fashionable with a petite nose and demure presence.  If you were a single man you 
might like to take her out.  If you were in retailing, you might hire her as a fashion model.    But what if I were to tell you that you're wrong? Wh at if I said this picture is of a woman in her 60s 
or 70s who looks sad, has a huge nose, and certainly is no model.  She's someone you probably would 
help cross the street.    Who's right? Look at the pict ure again.  Can you see the old woma n? If you can't, keep trying.  
Can you see her big hook nose? Her shawl?    If you and I were talking face to face, we coul d discuss the picture.  You could describe what you 
see to me, and I could talk to you about what I s ee.  We could continue to communicate until you 
clearly showed me what you see in the pict ure and I clearly showed you what I see. 
   Because we can't do that, turn to page 45 and st udy the picture there and th en look at this picture 
again.  Can you see the old woman now? It's import ant that you see her before you continue reading. 
   I first encountered this exercise many years ag o at the Harvard Business School.  The instructor was 
using it to demonstrate clearly and eloquently that two people can see the same thing, disagree, and yet 
both be right.  It's not logical; it's psychological.     He brought into the room a stack of large card s, half of which had the image of the young woman 
you saw on page 25, and the other half of which had the old woman on page 45. 
   He passed them out to the class, the picture of  the young woman to one side of the room and the 
picture of the old woman to the other.  He asked us to  look at the cards, conc entrate on them for about 
10 seconds and then pass them back in.  He then projected upon the screen the picture you saw on 
page 26 combining both images and asked the class to  describe what they saw.  Almost every person 
in that class who had first seen the young woma n's image on a card saw the young woman in the 
picture.  And almost every person in that class who had first seen the old woman's image on a card 
saw an old woman in the picture.  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
 
   The professor then asked one student to explain wh at he saw to a student on the opposite side of the 
room.  As they talked back and fort h, communication problems flared up. 
   "What do you mean, 'old lady'? She co uldn't be more than 20 or 22 years old! 
   "Oh, come on.  You have to be joking.  She's 70 -- could be pushing 80!"    "What's the matter with you?  Are you blind?  Th is lady is young, good looking.  I'd like to take 
her out.  She's lovely."    "Lovely? She's an old hag.    The arguments went back and forth, each person  sure of, and adamant in, his or her position.  All 
of this occurred in spite of one exceedingly import ant advantage the students had -- most of them knew 
early in the demonstration that another point of view did, in fact, exist -- something many of us would 
never admit.  Nevertheless, at first, only a few stud ents really tried to see this picture from another 
frame of reference.    After a period of futile communication, one st udent went up to the screen and pointed to a line on 
the drawing.  "There is the young woman's necklace."  The other one said, "No, that is the old woman's 
mouth." Gradually, they began to calmly discuss specif ic points of difference, and finally one student, 
and then another, experienced sudden recognition when the images of bo th came into focus.  Through 
continued calm, respectful, and specific communication,  each of us in the room was finally able to see 
the other point of view.  But when  we looked away and then back, mo st of us would immediately see 
the image we had been conditioned to s ee in the 10-second period of time. 
   I frequently use this perception demonstration in working with people an d organizations because it 
yields so many deep insights into both personal and interpersonal effectiveness.  It shows, first of all, 
how powerfully conditioning affects our perceptions, our paradigms.  If 10 seconds can have that kind 
of impact on the way we see things, what about the co nditioning of a lifetime?  The influences in our 
lives -- family, school, church, work environment, friends, associates, and current social paradigms such 
as the personality ethic -- all have made their silent  unconscious impact on us and help shape our frame 
of reference, our paradigms, our maps.    It also shows that these paradigms are the sour ce of our attitudes and behaviors.  We cannot act 
with integrity outside of them.  We simply cannot maintain wholeness if we talk and walk differently 
than we see.  If you were among the 90 percent who typically see the young woman in the composite 
picture when conditioned to do so, you undoubtedly fo und it difficult to think in terms of having to 
help her cross the street.  Both your attitude ab out her and your behavior toward her had to be 
congruent with the way you saw her.    This brings into focus one of the basic flaws of  the personality ethic.  To try to change outward 
attitudes and behaviors does very little good in th e long run if we fail to examine the basic paradigms 
from which those attitudes and behaviors flow.    This perception demonstration also shows ho w powerfully our paradigms affect the way we interact 
with other people.  As clearly and objectively as we think we see things, we begin to realize that others 
see them differently from their own apparently equa lly clear and objective point of view.  "Where we 
stand depends on where we sit."    Each of us tends to think we see things as they are, that we are objective.  But this is not the case.  
We see the world, not as it is, but as we are -- or, as we are conditioned to see it.  When we open our 
mouths to describe what we see, we in effect desc ribe ourselves, our perceptions, our paradigms.  
When other people disagree with us, we immediately th ink something is wrong with them.  But, as the 
demonstration shows, sincere, clearheaded people see things differently, each looking through the 
unique lens of experience.    This does not mean that there are no facts.  In the demonstration, two individuals who initially 
have been influenced by different conditioning pict ures look at the third pi cture together.  They are 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
now both looking at the same iden tical facts -- black lines and whit e spaces -- and they would both 
acknowledge these as facts.  But each person's interp retation of these facts repr esents prior experiences, 
and the facts have no meaning whatso ever apart from the interpretation. 
   The more aware we are of our basic paradigms, ma ps, or assumptions, and the extent to which we 
have been influenced by our experience, the mo re we can take responsib ility for those paradigms, 
examine them, test them against reality, listen to others and be open to th eir perceptions, thereby 
getting a larger picture and a far more objective view.  The Power of a Paradigm Shift     Perhaps the most important insight to be gained from the perception demonstration is in the area of 
paradigm shifting, what we might call the "Aha!" expe rience when someone finally "sees" the composite 
picture in another way.  The more bound a person is by the initial perception, the more powerful the 
"Aha!" experience is.  It's as though a light were suddenly turned on inside. 
   The term Paradigm Shift was introduced by Thom as Kuhn in his highly influential landmark book, 
The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.  Kuhn show s how almost every significant breakthrough in the 
field of scientific endeavor is first a break with trad ition, with old ways of th inking, with old paradigms. 
   For Ptolemy, the great Egyptian astronomer, the earth was the center of the universe.  But 
Copernicus created a Paradigm Shift, and a great deal of resistance and persecution as well, by placing 
the sun at the center.  Suddenly, everyth ing took on a different interpretation. 
   The Newtonian model of physics was a cloc kwork paradigm and is still the basis of modern 
engineering.  But it was partial, incomplete.  The scientific world was revolutionized by the 
Einsteinian paradigm, the relativity paradigm, whic h had much higher predictive and explanatory 
value.    Until the germ theory was de veloped, a high percentage of women and children died during 
childbirth, and one could understand why.  In m ilitary skirmishes, more men were dying from small 
wounds and diseases than from the major traumas on the front lines.  But as soon as the germ theory 
was developed, a whole new paradigm, a better, improved way of understanding what was happening made dramatic, significant medical improvement possible.    The United States today is the fruit of a Paradig m Shift.  The traditional concept of government for 
centuries had been a monarchy, the divine right of kings.  Then a different paradigm was developed -- 
government of the people, by the people, and for the people.  And a constitutional democracy was 
born, unleashing tremendous human energy and inge nuity, and creating a standard of living, of 
freedom and liberty, of influence and hope unequaled in the history of the world. 
   Not all Paradigm Shifts are in positive direct ions.  As we have observed, the shift from the 
character ethic to the personality ethic has drawn us aw ay from the very roots that nourish true success 
and happiness.    But whether they shift us in positive or nega tive directions, whether they are instantaneous or 
developmental, Paradigm Shifts move us from one way of seeing the world to another.  And those 
shifts create powerful change.  Our paradigms, correct  or incorrect, are the sources of our attitudes and 
behaviors, and ultimately our relationships with others.    I remember a mini-Paradigm Shift I experienced one Sunday morning on a subway in New York.  
People were sitting quietly -- some reading newspapers, some lost in thought, some resting with their 
eyes closed.  It was a calm, peaceful scene.    Then suddenly, a man and his children entered the subway car.  The children were so loud and 
rambunctious that instantly the whole climate changed. 
   The man sat down next to me and closed his eyes, apparently oblivious to the situation.  The 
children were yelling back and forth, throwing things , even grabbing people's papers.  It was very 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
disturbing.  And yet, the man sitting next to me did nothing. 
   It was difficult not to feel irritated.  I could not believe that he could be  so insensitive to let his 
children run wild like that and do no thing about it, taking no responsib ility at all.  It was easy to see 
that everyone else on the subway felt irritated, too.   So finally, with what I felt was unusual patience 
and restraint, I turned to him and said, "Sir, your children are really disturbi ng a lot of people.  I 
wonder if you couldn't control them a little more?"    The man lifted his gaze as if to come to a con sciousness of the situation fo r the first time and said 
softly, "Oh, you're right.  I guess I should do some thing about it.  We just came from the hospital 
where their mother died about an hour ago.  I don' t know what to think, an d I guess they don't know 
how to handle it either."    Can you imagine what I felt at that mome nt? My paradigm shifted.  Suddenly I saw things 
differently, I felt differently, I behaved differently.  My irritation vanished.  I didn't have to worry 
about controlling my attitude or my behavior; my he art was filled with the man's pain.  Feelings of 
sympathy and compassion flowed freely.  "Your wi fe just died? Oh, I'm so sorry. Can you tell me 
about it? What can I do to help?" Everything changed in an instant. 
   Many people experience a similar fundamental sh ift in thinking when they  face a life-threatening 
crisis and suddenly see their priorities in a different light, or when they sudden ly step into a new role, 
such as that of husband or wife, pare nt or grandparent, manager or leader. 
   We could spend weeks, months, even years labori ng with the personality ethic trying to change our 
attitudes and behaviors and not even begin to ap proach the phenomenon of change that occurs 
spontaneously when we see things differently.    It becomes obvious that if we want to make relatively minor changes in our lives, we can perhaps 
appropriately focus on our attitudes and behaviors.   But if we want to make significant, quantum 
change, we need to work on our basic paradigms. 
   In the words of Thoreau, "For every thousand hack ing at the leaves of evil, there is one striking at 
the root." We can only achieve quantum improvements in our lives as we quit hacking at the leaves of 
attitude and behavior and get to work on the root, the paradigms from which our attitudes and 
behaviors flow.  Seeing and Being     Of course, not all Paradigm Shifts are instantane ous.  Unlike my instant in sight on the subway, the 
paradigm-shifting experience Sandra and I had wi th our son was a slow, difficult, and deliberate 
process.  The approach we had first taken with him was the outgrowth of years of conditioning and experience in the personality ethic.  It was the result of deeper paradigms we held about our own 
success as parents as well as the me asure of success of our children.  And it was not until we changed 
those basic paradigms, quantum change in ourselves and in the situation. 
   In order to see our son differently, Sandra an d I had to be differently.  Our new paradigm was 
created as we invested in the growth  and development of our own character. 
   Our Paradigms are the way we "see" the world or ci rcumstances -- not in term s of our visual sense of 
sight, but in terms of perceiving, understanding,  and interpreting. Paradigms are inseparable from 
character.  Being is seeing in the human dimension.  And what we see is high ly interrelated to what 
we are.  We can't go very far to change our seeing  without simultaneously changing our being, and 
vice versa.    Even in my apparently instantaneous paradigm- shifting experience that  morning on the subway, 
my change of vision was a result of  -- and limited by -- my basic character. 
   I'm sure there are people who, even suddenly un derstanding the true situation, would have felt no 
more than a twinge of regret or vague guilt as th ey continued to sit in embarrassed silence beside the 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
grieving, confused man.  On the other hand, I am  equally certain there are people who would have 
been far more sensitive in the first place, who may have recognized that a deeper problem existed and 
reached out to understand and help before I did.    Paradigms are powerful because they create th e lens through which we see the world.  The power 
of a Paradigm Shift is the essential power of quantum change, whether that shift is an instantaneous or 
a slow and deliberate process.  The Principle-Centered Paradigm     The character ethic is based on the fundamental idea that there are principles that govern human 
effectiveness -- natural laws in the human dimension that are just as real, just as unchanging and 
unarguably "there" as laws such as gravity are in the physical dimension.    An idea of the reality -- and the impact -- of these principles can be captured in another 
paradigm-shifting experience as told by Frank Kock in Proceedi ngs, the magazine of the Naval 
Institute.    Two battleships assigned to the training squadr on had been at sea on maneuvers in heavy weather 
for several days.  I was serving on the lead battleshi p and was on watch on the bridge as night fell.  
The visibility was poor with patchy fog, so the capt ain remained on the bridge  keeping an eye on all 
activities.    Shortly after dark, the lookout on the wing of the bridge reported, "Light, bearing on the starboard 
bow."    "Is it steady or moving astern?" the captain called out.    Lookout replied, "Steady, captain," which mean t we were on a dangerous collision course with that 
ship.    The captain then called to the signal man, "Signal that ship: We are on a collision course, advise you change course 20 degrees."    Back came a signal, "Advisable for you to change course 20 degrees."    The captain said, "Send, I'm a captain, change course 20 degrees."    "I'm a seaman second class," came the reply.  "You had better change course 20 degrees."    By that time, the captain was furious.  He spat  out, "Send, I'm a battleship.  Change course 20 
degrees."    Back came the flashing  light, "I'm a lighthouse." 
   We changed course    The A Paradigm Shift is the "a-h a" experience associated with fi nally perceiving or understanding 
some aspect of the world (or a ci rcumstance) in a different way. Paradigm Shift experienced by the 
captain -- and by us as we read this account -- puts th e situation in a totally different light.  We can see 
a reality that is superseded by his limited perceptions -- a reality that is as critical for us to understand 
in our daily lives as it was for the captain in the fog.    Principles are like lighthouses.  They are natural  laws that cannot be broken.  As Cecil B. deMille 
observed of the principles contained in his monumental movie, The Ten Commandments, "It is impossible for us to break the law.  We can only break ourselves against the law."    While individuals may look at their own lives  and interactions in terms of paradigms or maps 
emerging out of their experience  and conditioning, these maps are  not the territory.  They are a 
"subjective reality," only an attempt to describe the territory.    The "objective reality," or the territory itself, is composed of "lighthouse" principles that govern 
human growth and happiness -- natural laws that are woven into the fabric of every civilized society 
throughout history and comprise the roots of ev ery family and institution that has endured and 
prospered.  The degree to which our mental maps accurately describe the territory does not alter its 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
existence. 
   The reality of such principles or natural laws  becomes obvious to anyone who thinks deeply and 
examines the cycles of social history.  These princi ples surface time and time again, and the degree to 
which people in society recognize and live in harmon y with them moves them toward either survival 
and stability or disintegration and destruction.    The principles I am referring to are not esoteric , mysterious, or "religious" ideas.  There is not one 
principle taught in this book that is unique to any specific faith or religion, including my own.  These 
principles are a part of every major enduring relig ion, as well as enduring social philosophies and 
ethical systems.  They are self-evident and can easily be validated by any individual.  It's almost as if 
these principles or natural laws are part of the huma n condition, part of the human consciousness, part 
of the human conscience.  They seem to exist in a ll human beings, regardless of social conditioning and 
loyalty to them, even though they might be subm erged or numbed by conditions or disloyalty. 
   I am referring, for example, to the principle of  fairness, out of which our whole concept of equity 
and justice is developed.  Little children seem to have  an innate sense of the idea of fairness even apart 
from opposite conditioning experiences.  There are  vast differences in how fairness is defined and 
achieved, but there is almost universal awareness of the idea.    Other examples would include integrity and hones ty.  They create the foundation of trust which is 
essential to cooperation and long-ter m personal and interpersonal growth. 
   Another principle is human dignity.  The ba sic concept in the United States Declaration of 
Independence bespeaks this value or principle.  "We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men 
are created equal and endowed by their Creator with ce rtain inalienable rights, that among these are life, 
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness."    Another principle is service, or the idea of maki ng a contribution.  Another is quality or excellence. 
   There is the principle of potential, the idea  that we are embryonic and can grow and develop and 
release more and more potential, develop more and mo re talents.  Highly related to potential is the 
principle of growth -- the process of releasing potent ial and developing talents,  with the accompanying 
need for principles such as patien ce, nurturance, and encouragement. 
   Principles are not practices.  A practice is a spec ific activity or action.  A practice that works in one 
circumstance will not necessarily work in another, as  parents who have tried to raise a second child 
exactly like they did the first one can readily attest.    While practices are situationally specific, principl es are deep, fundamental tr uths that have universal 
application.  They apply to individuals, to marriages , to families, to private an d public organizations of 
every kind.  When these truths are internalized in to habits, they empower people to create a wide 
variety of practices to deal with different situations.    While practices are situationally specific, principl es are deep, fundamental tr uths that have universal 
application.  They apply to individuals, to marriages , to families, to private an d public organizations of 
every kind.  When these truths are internalized in to habits, they empower people to create a wide 
variety of practices to deal with different situations.    Principles are not values.  A gang of thieves can share values, but they are in violation of the 
fundamental principles we're talking about.  Principl es are the territory.  Valu es are maps.  When we 
value correct principles, we have truth -- a knowledge of things as they are. 
   Principles are guidelines for human conduct that  are proven to have enduring, permanent value.  
They're fundamental.  They're esse ntially unarguable because they are self-evident.  One way to 
quickly grasp the self-evident nature of principles is  to simply consider the absurdity of attempting to 
live an effective life based on their opposites.  I do ubt that anyone would seriously consider unfairness, 
deceit, baseness, uselessness, mediocrity, or degenerat ion to be a solid foundati on for lasting happiness 
and success.  Although people ma y argue about how these principles  are defined or manifested or 
achieved, there seems to be an innate co nsciousness and awareness that they exist. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
 
   The more closely our maps or paradigms are alig ned with these principles or natural laws, the more 
accurate and functional they will be.  Correct ma ps will infinitely impact our personal and 
interpersonal effectiveness far more than any amount of effort expended on changing our attitudes and 
behaviors.  Principles of Growth and Change     The glitter of the personality et hic, the massive appeal, is that th ere is some quick and easy way to 
achieve quality of life -- personal e ffectiveness and rich, deep relation ships with other people -- without 
going through the natural process of wo rk and growth that makes it possible 
   It's symbol without substance.  It's the "get  rich quick" scheme promising "wealth without work." 
And it might even appear to succ eed -- but the schemer remains. 
   The personality ethic is illusory and deceptive.   And trying to get high-quality results with its 
techniques and quick fixes is just about as effective as trying to get to some  place in Chicago using a 
map of Detroit.    In the words of Erich Fromm, an astute observer  of the roots and fruits of the personality ethic. 
   Today we come across an individual who beha ves like an automaton, who does not know or 
understand himself, and the only person that he kn ows is the person that he is supposed to be, whose 
meaningless chatter has replaced communicative sp eech, whose synthetic smile has replaced genuine 
laughter, and whose sense of dull despair has taken th e place of genuine pain.  Two statements may be 
said concerning this individual.  One is that he suffers from defects of spontaneity and individuality 
which may seem to be incurable.  At  the same time it may be said of  him he does not differ essentially 
from the millions of the rest of us who walk upon this earth. 
   In all of life, there are sequential stages of gr owth and development.  A child learns to turn over, to 
sit up, to crawl, and then to walk and run.  Each step is important and each one takes time.  No step 
can be skipped.    This is true in all phases of life, in all areas of development, whether it be learning to play the piano 
or communicate effectively with a working associate.  It is true with individuals, with marriages, with 
families, and with organizations.    We know and accept this fact or principle of pr ocess in the area of physical things, but to understand 
it in emotional areas, in human relations, and even  in the area of personal character is less common and 
more difficult.  And even if we unde rstand it, to accept it and to live in harmony with it are even less 
common and more difficult.  Consequently, we sometime s look for a shortcut, expecting to be able to 
skip some of these vital steps in order to save time and effort and still reap the desired result. 
   But what happens when we attempt to shortcut a natural process in our growth and development? 
If you are only an average tennis player but decide to  play at a higher level in order to make a better 
impression, what will result? Would positive thinking  alone enable you to comp ete effectively against a 
professional?    What if you were to lead your friends to believe  you could play the piano at concert hall level while 
your actual present skill was that of a beginner?    The answers are obvious.  It is simply impossibl e to violate, ignore, or shortcut this development 
process.  It is contrary to nature, and attempting to  seek such a shortcut only  results in disappointment 
and frustration.    On a 10-point scale, if I am at level two in any fiel d, and desire to move to level five, I must first take 
the step toward level three.  "A thousand-mile journe y begins with the first step" and can only be taken 
one step at a time.  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
 
   If you don't let a teacher know what level yo u are -- by asking a question, or revealing your 
ignorance -- you will not learn or grow.  You cannot pretend for long, for you will eventually be found 
out.  Admission of ignorance is often the first step  in our education.  Thoreau taught, "How can we 
remember our ignorance, which ou r growth requires, when we are using our knowledge all of the 
time?"    I recall one occasion when two young women, daug hters of a friend of mine, came to me tearfully, 
complaining about their father's harshness and lack of understanding.  They were afraid to open up 
with their parents for fear of the consequences.  An d yet they desperately needed their parents' love, 
understanding, and guidance.    I talked with the father and found that he was intellectually aware of what was happening.  But 
while he admitted he had a temper problem, he refused to take responsibility for it and to honestly accept the fact that his emotional development le vel was low.  It was more than his pride could 
swallow to take the first step toward change.    To relate effectively with a wife, a husband, ch ildren, friends, or working associates, we must learn 
to listen.  And this requires emotional strength.  Listening involves patience , openness, and the desire 
to understand -- highly developed qualities of charact er.  It's so much easier to operate from a low 
emotional level and to give high-level advice.    Our level of development is fairly obvious with  tennis or piano playing, where it is impossible to 
pretend.  But it is not so obvious in the areas of  character and emotional development.  We can "pose" 
and "put on" for a stranger or an associate.  We can pretend.  And for a while we can get by with it -- 
at least in public.  We might even deceive ourselves.   Yet I believe that most of us know the truth of 
what we really are inside; and I think many of those we live with and work with do as well. 
   I have seen the consequences of attempting to shortcut this natural process of growth often in the 
business world, where executives attempt to "buy" a new culture of improved productivity, quality, 
morale, and customer service with the strong speeche s, smile training, and external interventions, or 
through mergers, acquisitions, and friendly or unfr iendly takeovers.  But they ignore the low-trust 
climate produced by such manipulations.  When  these methods don't work, they look for other 
personality ethic techniques that will -- all the time ignoring and vi olating the natural principles and 
processes on which high-trust culture is based.    I remember violating this principle myself as a father many years ago.  One day I returned home to 
my little girl's third-year birthday party to find her in the corner of  the front room, defiantly clutching 
all of her presents, unwilling to let the other childre n play with them.  The first thing I noticed was 
several parents in the room witnessi ng this selfish display.  I was embarrassed, and doubly so because 
at the time I was teaching university classes in human relations.  And I knew, or at least felt, the expectation of these parents.    The atmosphere in the room was really ch arged -- the children were crowding around my little 
daughter with their hands out, asking to play with the presents they had just  given, and my daughter 
was adamantly refusing.  I said to myself, "Certainly  I should teach my daughter to share.  The value 
of sharing is one of the most  basic things we believe in." 
   So I first tried a simple request.  "Honey, woul d you please share with your friends the toys they've 
given you?    "No," she replied flatly.    My second method was to use a little reasoning.  "Honey, if you learn to sh are your toys with them 
when they are at your home, then  when you go to their homes they  will share their toys with you." 
   Again, the immediate reply was "No!"    I was becoming a little more embarrassed, for it was evident I was having no influence.  The third 
method was bribery.  Very softly I said, "Honey, if  you share, I've got special surprise for you.  I'll 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
give you a piece of gum." 
   "I don't want gum!" she exploded.    Now I was becoming exasperated.  For my fourth  attempt, I resorted to fear and threat.  "Unless 
you share, you will be in real trouble!"    "I don't care!" she cried.  "These are my things.  I don't have to share!" 
   Finally, I resorted to force.  I merely took some of the toys and gave them to the other kids.  "Here, 
kids, play with these."    But at that moment, I valued  the opinion those parents had of  me more than the growth and 
development of my child and our relationship togethe r.  I simply made an initial judgment that I was 
right; she should share, and she was wrong in not doing so. 
   Perhaps I superimposed a higher-level expectatio n on her simply because on my own scale I was at 
a lower level.  I was unable or unwilling to give pati ence or understanding, so I expected her to give 
things.  In an attempt to compensate for my defi ciency, I borrowed strength  f r o m  m y  p o s i t i o n  a n d  
authority and forced her to do what I wanted her to do.    But borrowing strength builds weakness.  It builds weakness in the borrower because it reinforces 
dependence on external factors to get things do ne.  It builds weakness in  the person forced to 
acquiesce, stunting the development of independent reasoning, growth , and internal discipline.  And 
finally, it builds weakness in the relationship.  Fear replaces cooperation, and both people involved 
become more arbitrary and defensive.    And what happens when the source of borrowed stre ngth -- be it superior size or physical strength, 
position, authority, credentials, status symbols, a ppearance, or past achievements -- changes or is no 
longer there?    Had I been more mature, I could have relied on  my own intrinsic strength -- my understanding of 
sharing and of growth and my capacity to love and nurture -- and allowed my daughter to make a free 
choice as to whether she wanted to share or not to share.  Perhaps after attempting to reason with her, 
I could have turned the attention of the children to  an interesting game, taking all that emotional 
pressure off my child.  I've learned that once child ren gain a sense of real possession, they share very 
naturally, freely, and spontaneously.    My experience has been that there are times to teach and times not to teach.  When relationships 
are strained and the air charged with emotion, an a ttempt to teach is often perceived as a form of 
judgment and rejection.  But to take the child alon e, quietly, when the rela tionship is good and to 
discuss the teaching or the value seems to have mu ch greater impact.  It may have been that the 
emotional maturity to do that was beyond my leve l of patience and internal control at the time. 
   Perhaps a sense of possessing needs to come be fore a sense of genuine sh aring.  Many people who 
give mechanically or refuse to give and share in their marriages and families may never have 
experienced what it means to possess themselves, th eir own sense of identity and self-worth.  Really 
helping our children grow may involv e being patient enough to allow them the sense of possession as 
well as being wise enough to teach them the valu e of giving and providing the example ourselves. 
 The Way We See the Problem is the Problem     People are intrigued when they see good things happening in the lives of individuals, families, and 
organizations that are based on solid principles.  They admire such personal strength and maturity, 
such family unity and teamwork, such adap tive synergistic organizational culture. 
   And their immediate request is very revealing of  their basic paradigm.  "How do you do it? Teach 
me the techniques." What they're re ally saying is, "Give me some quic k fix advice or solution that will 
relieve the pain in my own situation."  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
 
   They will find people who will meet their want s and teach these things; and for a short time, skills 
and techniques may appear to work.  They may elim inate some of the cosmetic or acute problems 
through social aspirin and band-aids.    But the underlying chronic condition remains,  and eventually new acute symptoms will appear.  
The more people are into quick fix and focus on the acute problems and pa in, the more that very 
approach contributes to the underlying chronic condition.    The way we see the problem is the problem.    Look again at some of the concerns that introd uced this chapter, and at the impact of personality 
ethic thinking.    I've taken course after course on effective mana gement training.  I expect a lot out of my employees 
and I work hard to be friendly tow ard them and to treat them right.  But I don't feel any loyalty from 
them.  I think if I were home sick for a day, they 'd spend most of their ti me gabbing at the water 
fountain.  Why can't I train them to be independen t and responsible -- or find employees who can be? 
   The personality ethic tells me I could take some  kind of dramatic action -- shake things up, make 
heads roll -- that would make my employees shape up and appreciate what they have.  Or that I could 
find some motivational training program that woul d get them committed.  Or even that I could hire 
new people that would do a better job.    But is it possible that under that apparently disloyal behavior, these em ployees question whether I 
really act in their best interest? Do they feel like I' m treating them as mechanical objects? Is there some 
truth to that?    Deep inside, is that really the way I see them? Is there a chance the way I look at the people who 
work for me is part of the problem?    There's so much to do.  And there's never enough  time.  I feel pressured and hassled all day, every 
day, seven days a week.  I've attended time manageme nt seminars and I've tried half a dozen different 
planning systems.  They've helped some, but I still don't feel I'm living the happy, productive, peaceful 
life I want to live.    The personality ethic tells me there must be something out there -- some  new planner or seminar 
that will help me handle all these pressures in a more efficient way.    But is there a chance that effi ciency is not the answer? Is getting more things done in less time going 
to make a difference -- or will it just increase the pace at which I react to the people and circumstances 
that seem to control my life?    Could there be something I need to see in a deeper, more fundamental wa y -- some paradigm within 
myself that affects the way I see my  time, my life, and my own nature? 
   My marriage has gone flat.  We don't fight or anything; we just don't lo ve each other anymore.  
We've gone to counseling; we've tried a number of th ings, but we just can't seem to rekindle the feeling 
we used to have.    The personality ethic tells me there must be so me new book or some semi nar where people get all 
their feelings out that would help my wife understand me better.  Or maybe that it's useless, and only 
a new relationship will provide the love I need.    But is it possible that my spouse isn't the real problem? Could I be empowering my spouse's 
weaknesses and making my life a function of the way I'm treated?    Do I have some basic paradigm about my spouse, about marriage, abou t what love really is, that is 
feeding the problem?    Can you see how fundamentally the paradigms of  the personality ethic affect the very way we see 
our problems as well as the way we attempt to solve them?    Whether people see it or not, many are beco ming disillusioned with th e empty promises of the 
personality ethic.  As I travel around the country and work with organizations , I find that long-term 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
thinking executives are simply tu rned off by psyche up psychology and "motivational" speakers who 
have nothing more to share than entert aining stories mingled with platitudes. 
   They want substance; they want  process.  They want more than aspirin and band-aids.  They want 
to solve the chronic underlying problems and focus on the principles that bring long-term results. 
 A New Level of Thinking     Albert Einstein observed, "The significant  prob lems we face cannot be solved at the same level of 
thinking we were at when we created them.    As we look around us and within us and reco gnize the problems created as we live and interact 
within the personality ethic, we be gin to realize that these are deep, fundamental problems that cannot 
be solved on the superficial level on which they were created.    We need a new level, a deeper level of thinking  -- a paradigm based on the principles that accurately 
describe the territory of effective human being an d interacting -- to solve these deep concerns. 
   This new level of thinking is what Seven Habi ts of Highly Effective People is about.  It's a 
principle-centered, character-based, "Inside-Out" appr oach to personal and inte rpersonal effectiveness. 
   "Inside-Out" means to start first with self; even  more fundamentally, to st art with the most inside 
part of self -- with your paradigms, your character, and your motives.    It says if you want to have a happy marriage, be the kind of person who generates positive energy 
and sidesteps negative energy rather than empowerin g it.  If you want to have a more pleasant, 
cooperative teenager, be a more understanding, empa thic, consistent, loving parent.  If you want to 
h a v e  m o r e  f r e e d o m ,  m o r e  l a t i t u d e  i n  y o u r  j o b ,  be a more responsible, a more helpful, a more 
contributing employee.  If you want to be truste d, be trustworthy.  If you want the secondary 
greatness of recognized talent, focus first on primary greatness of character. 
   The Inside-Out approach says that Private Vict ories TM precede Public Victories TM, that making 
and keeping promises to ourselves precedes making and keeping promises to others.  It says it is futile 
to put personality ahead of character, to try to im prove relationships with others before improving 
ourselves.    Inside-Out is a process -- a continuing process of renewal based on the natural laws that govern 
human growth and progress.  It's an upward spiral of growth that leads to progressively higher forms 
of responsible independence an d effective interdependence. 
   I have had the opportunity to work with many people -- wonderful people, talented people, people 
who deeply want to achieve happin ess and success, people who are searc hing, people who are hurting.  
I've worked with business executives, college studen ts, church and civic groups, families and marriage 
partners.  And in all of my experience, I have never seen lasting solutions to problems, lasting 
happiness and success, that came from the outside in.    What I have seen result from the outside-in paradigm is unhappy people who feel victimized and 
immobilized, who focus on the weaknesses of othe r people and the circumstances they feel are 
responsible for their own stagnant situation.  I've  seen unhappy marriages where each spouse wants 
the other to change, where each is confessing the ot her's "sins," where each is trying to shape up the 
other.  I've seen labor management disputes wher e people spend tremendous amounts of time and 
energy trying to create legislation that would force pe ople to act as though the foundation of trust were 
really there.    Members of our family have lived in three of th e "hottest" spots on earth -- South Africa, Israel, and 
Ireland -- and I believe the source of the continuing  problems in each of these places has been the 
dominant social paradigm of outside-in.  Each involv ed group is convinced the problem is "out there" 
and if "they" (meaning others) would "shape up" or suddenly "ship out" of  existence, the problem 
would be solved. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Inside-Out is a dramatic Paradigm Shift for mo st people, largely because of the powerful impact of 
conditioning and the current social paradigm of the personality ethic.    But from my own experience -- both personal an d in working with thousands of other people -- and 
from careful examination of successful individuals and societies throughout history, I am persuaded 
that many of the principles embodi ed in the Seven Habits are already deep within us, in our conscience 
and our common sense.  To recognize and develop them and to use them in meeting our deepest 
concerns, we need to think differently, to shift our paradigms to a new, deeper, "Inside-Out" level. 
   As we sincerely seek to understand and integ rate these principles into our lives, I am convinced we 
will discover and rediscover the truth of T. S. Eliot's observation:    We must not cease from exploration and the end of all our exploring will be to arrive where we 
began and to know the place for the first time.  
The Seven Habits -- An Overview 
    We are what we repeatedly do.  Excellence, then, is not an act, but a habit. 
   -- Aristotl 
 
   Our character, basically, is a composite of our habits .  "Sow a thought, reap an action; sow an action, 
reap a habit; sow a habit, reap a character; sow a character, reap a destiny," the maxim goes.    Habits are powerful factors in our lives.  Beca use they are consistent, often unconscious patterns, 
they constantly, daily, express our character and produce our effectiveness or ineffectiveness. 
   As Horace Mann, the great educator, once said, "Habits are like a cable.  We weave a strand of it 
everyday and soon it cannot be broken ." I personally do not agree with the last part of his expression.  
I know they can be broken.  Habits can be learned an d unlearned.  But I also know it isn't a quick fix.  
It involves a process and a tremendous commitment.    Those of us who watched the lunar voyage of  Apollo 11 were transfixed as we saw the first men 
walk on the moon and return to earth.  Superl atives such as "fantastic" and "incredible" were 
inadequate to describe those eventful days.  But to ge t there, those astronauts literally had to break out 
of the tremendous gravity pull of the earth.  More energy was spent in the firs t few minutes of lift-off, 
in the first few miles of travel, than was used over the next several days to travel half a million miles. 
   Habits, too, have tremendous gravity pull -- more than most people realize or would admit.  
Breaking deeply imbedded habitual tendencies such  as procrastination, impatience, criticalness, or 
selfishness that violate basic principles of human effe ctiveness involves more than a little willpower and 
a few minor changes in our lives.  "Lift off" takes a tremendous effort, but once we break out of the 
gravity pull, our freedom takes on a whole new dimension.    Like any natural force, gravity pull can work with  us or against us.  The gravity pull of some of our 
habits may currently be keeping us from going where we want to go.  But it is also gravity pull that keeps our world together, that keep s the planets in their orbits and our universe in order.  It is a 
powerful force, and if we use it effectively, we can use the gravity pull of habit to create the 
cohesiveness and order necessary to establish effectiveness in our lives.  "Habits" Defined     For our purposes, we will define a habit as th e intersection of knowledge, skill, and desire.  
Knowledge is the theoretical paradigm, the what to do and the why.  Skill is the how to do.  And 
desire is the motivation, the want to do.  In order to make something a habit in our lives, we have to 
have all three. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   I may be ineffective in my interactions with my  work associates, my spouse, or my children because 
I constantly tell them what I think, but I never really listen to them.  Unless I search out correct 
principles of human interaction, I ma y not even know I need to listen. 
   Even if I do know that in order to interact effe ctively with others I really need to listen to them, I 
may not have the skill.  I may not know how to really listen deeply to another human being. 
   But knowing I need to listen and knowing how to  listen is not enough.  Unless I want to listen, 
unless I have the desire, it won't be a habit in my life.  Creating a habit requires work in all three 
dimensions.    The being/seeing change is an upward proce ss -- being changing, seeing , which in turn changes 
being, and so forth, as we move in  an upward spiral of growth.  By working on knowledge, skill, and 
desire, we can break through to new levels of person al and interpersonal effectiveness as we break with 
old paradigms that may have been a source of pseudo-security for years.    It's sometimes a painful process.  It's a change that has to be motivated by a higher purpose, by the 
willingness to subordinate what yo u think you want now for what you want later.  But this process 
produces happiness, "the object and design of our existence." Happiness ca n be defined, in part at least, 
as the fruit of the desire and ability to sacrific e what we want now for what we want eventually. 
 The Maturity Continuum TM     The Seven Habits are not a set of separate or piecemeal psyche-up formulas.  In harmony with the 
natural laws of growth, they provide an incrementa l, sequential, highly integrated approach to the 
development of personal and interpersonal effectiven ess.  They move us progressively on a Maturity 
Continuum from dependence to interdependence.    We each begin life as an in fant, totally dependent on others.  We are directed, nurtured, and 
sustained by others.  Without this nurturing, we woul d only live for a few hours or a few days at the 
most.    Then gradually, over the ensuing months an d years, we become more and more independent -- 
physically, mentally, emotionally, and financially -- until eventually we can essentially take care of 
ourselves, becoming inner-directed and self-reliant.    As we continue to grow and mature, we beco me increasingly aware th at all of nature is 
interdependent, that there is an ec ological system that governs nature , including society.  We further 
discover that the higher reaches of our nature have to do with our relationships with others -- that 
human life also is interdependent.    Our growth from infancy to adulthood is in accordance with natural law.  And there are many 
dimensions to growth.  Reaching our full physical maturity, for example, does not necessarily assure 
us of simultaneous emotional or mental maturity.  On the other hand, a person's physical dependence 
does not mean that he or she is mentally or emotionally immature. 
   On the maturity continuum, dependence is the paradigm of you -- you take care of me; you come 
through for me; you didn't come thro ugh; I blame you for the results. 
   Independence is the paradigm of I -- I can do it ; I am responsible; I am self-reliant; I can choose. 
   Interdependence is the paradigm of we -- we can do it: we can cooperate; we can combine our 
talents and abilities and create something greater together.    Dependent people need others to get what they  want.  Independent people  can get what they want 
through their own effort.  Interdependent people comb ine their own efforts with the efforts of others to 
achieve their greatest success.    If I were physically dependent -- paralyzed or di sabled or limited in some physical way -- I would 
need you to help me.  If I were emotionally depe ndent, my sense of worth and security would come 
from your opinion of me.  If you didn't like me, it  could be devastating.  If I were intellectually 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
dependent, I would count on you to do my thinking for me, to think through the issues and problems of 
my life.    If I were independent, physically, I could pretty well make it on my own.  Mentally, I could think 
my own thoughts, I could move from one level of ab straction to another.  I could think creatively and 
analytically and organize and express my thoughts in understandable ways.  Emotionally, I would be 
validated from within.  I would be inner directed .  My sense of worth would not be a function of 
being liked or treated well.    It's easy to see that independence is much mo re mature than dependence.  Independence is a major 
achievement in and of itself.  Bu t independence is not supreme. 
   Nevertheless, the current social paradigm enthrone s independence.  It is the avowed goal of many 
individuals and social movements.  Most of the self-improvement ma terial puts independence on a 
pedestal, as though communication, team work, and cooperation were lesser values. 
   Nevertheless, the current social paradigm enthrone s independence.  It is the avowed goal of many 
individuals and social movements.  Most of the self-improvement ma terial puts independence on a 
pedestal, as though communication, team work, and cooperation were lesser values. 
   But much of our current emphasis on independence  is a reaction to dependence -- to having others 
control us, define us, use us, and manipulate us.    The little understood concept of interdepende nce appears to many to smack of dependence, and 
therefore, we find people often fo r selfish reasons, leaving their m arriages, abandoning their children, 
and forsaking all kinds of social responsi bility -- all in the name of independence. 
   T h e  k i n d  o f  r e a c t i o n  t h a t  r e s u l t s  i n  p e o p l e  "throwing off their shackles," becoming "liberated," 
"asserting themselves," and "doing their own thing" often reveals more fundam ental dependencies that 
cannot be run away from because they are internal rat her than external -- dependencies such as letting 
the weaknesses of other people ruin our emotional live s or feeling victimized by people and events out 
of our control.    Of course, we may need to change our circumst ances.  But the dependence problem is a personal 
maturity issue that has little to do with circumstan ces.  Even with better circumstances, immaturity 
and dependence often persist.    True independence of character empowers us to ac t rather than be acted upon.  It frees us from our 
dependence on circumstances and other people and is a worthy, liberating goal.  But it is not the 
ultimate goal in effective living.    Independent thinking alone is not suited to in terdependent reality.  Independent people who do 
not have the maturity to think and act interdependent ly may be good individual producers, but they 
won't be good leaders or team players.  They're not coming from the paradigm of interdependence 
necessary to succeed in marriage, family, or organizational reality.    Life is, by nature, highly interdependent.  To try to achieve maximum effectiveness through 
independence is like trying to play tennis with a golf  club -- the tool is not suited to the reality. 
   Interdependence is a far more mature, more advanc ed concept.  If I am physically interdependent, I 
am self-reliant and capable, but I also realize that  you and I working together  can accomplish far more 
than, even at my best, I could accomplish alone.  If  I am emotionally interdependent, I derive a great 
sense of worth within myself, but I also recognize th e need for love, for giving, and for receiving love 
from others.  If I am intellectually interdependent, I re alize that I need the best thinking of other people 
to join with my own.    As an interdependent person, I have the oppo rtunity to share myself d eeply, meaningfully, with 
others, and I have access to the vast resources and potential of other human beings.    Interdependence is a choice only independen t people can make.  Dependent people cannot choose 
to become interdependent.  They don't have th e character to do it; they don't own enough of 
themselves. 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   That's why Habits 1, 2, and 3 in  the following chapters deal with self-mastery.  They move a person 
from dependence to independence.  They are the "P rivate Victories," the essence of character growth.  
Private Victories precede Public Victories.  You can' t invert that process anym ore than you can harvest 
a crop before you plant it.  It's Inside-Out.    As you become truly independent, you have th e foundation for effective interdependence.  You 
have the character base from which you can effectivel y work on the more personality-oriented "Public 
Victories" of teamwork, cooperation, and communication in Habits 4, 5, and 6. 
   That does not mean you have to be perfect in Habits 1, 2, and 3 before work ing on Habits 4, 5, and 6.  
Understanding the sequence will help you manage  your growth more effectively, but I'm not 
suggesting that you put yourself in isolation for se veral years until you fully develop Habits 1, 2, and 3. 
   As part of an interdependent world, you have to relate to that world every day.  But the acute 
problems of that world can easily obscure the ch ronic character causes.  Understanding how what you 
are impacts every interdependent interaction will he lp you to focus your e fforts sequentially, in 
harmony with the natural laws of growth.    Habit 7 is the habit of renewal -- a regular, balanced  renewal of the four basic dimensions of life.  It 
circles and embodies all the other habits.  It is th e habit of continuous improvement that creates the 
upward spiral of growth that lifts you to new levels  of understanding and livin g each of the habits as 
you come around to them on a progressively higher plane.    The diagram on the next page is a visual repres entation of the sequence and the interdependence of 
the Seven Habits, and will be used throughout this b ook as we explore both the sequential relationship 
between the habits and also their synergy -- how, in relating to each other, th ey create bold new forms 
of each other that add even more to their value.  Each concept or habit will be highlighted as it is 
introduced.  Effectiveness Defined     The Seven Habits are habits of effectiveness.  Because they are based on principles, they bring the 
maximum long-term beneficial results possible.  They become the basis of a person's character, 
creating an empowering center of correct maps from which an individual can effectively solve problems, 
maximize opportunities, and contin ually learn and integrate other prin ciples in an upward spiral of 
growth.    They are also habits of effectiveness because they  are based on a paradigm of effectiveness that is in 
harmony with a natural law, a prin ciple I call the "P/PC Balance," whic h many people break themselves 
against.  This principle can be easily understood  by remembering Aesop's fa ble of the Goose and the 
Golden Egg TM.    This fable is the story of a poor farmer who one day discovers in the nest of his pet goose a glittering 
golden egg.  At first, he thinks it must be some ki nd of trick.  But as he starts to throw the egg aside, 
he has second thoughts and takes it in to be appraised instead. 
   The egg is pure gold! The farmer can't belie ve his good fortune.  He becomes even more 
incredulous the following day when th e experience is repeated.  Day after day, he awakens to rush to 
the nest and find another golden egg.  He becomes fa bulously wealthy; it all seems too good to be true. 
   But with his increasing wealth comes greed and impatience.  Unable to wait day after day for the 
golden eggs, the farmer decides he will kill the goose and get them all at once.  But when he opens the 
goose, he finds it empty.  There are no golden e ggs -- and now there is no way to get any more.  The 
farmer has destroyed the goose that produced them.    But as the story shows, true effectiveness is a function of two things: what is produced (the golden 
eggs) and the producing asset or capacity to produce (the goose).  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   If you adopt a pattern of life that focuses on go lden eggs and neglects the goose, you will soon be 
without the asset that produces golden eggs.  On th e other hand, if you only take care of the goose 
with no aim toward the golden eggs, you soon won' t have the wherewithal to  feed yourself or the 
goose.    Effectiveness lies in the balance -- what I call the P/PC Balance TM.  P stands for production of 
desired results, the golden eggs.  PC stands for produc tion capability, the ability or asset that produces 
the golden eggs.  Three Kinds of Assets     Basically, there are three kinds of assets: physical , financial, and human.  Let's look at each one in 
turn.    A few years ago, I purchased a physical asset -- a power lawn mower.  I used it over and over again 
without doing anything to maintain it.  The mower worked well for two seasons, but then it began to break down.  When I tried to revive it with serv ice and sharpening, I discovered the engine had lost 
over half its original power capacity.  It was essentially worthless.    Had I invested in PC -- in preserving and mainta ining the asset -- I would still be enjoying its P -- the 
mowed lawn.  As it was, I had to spend far more  time and money replacing the mower than I ever 
would have spent, had I maintained it.  It simply wasn't effective. 
   In our quest for short-term re turns, or results, we often ruin a prized physical asset -- a car, a 
computer, a washer or dryer, even our body or ou r environment.  Keeping P and PC in balance makes 
a tremendous difference in the e ffective use of physical assets. 
   It also powerfully impacts the effective use of  financial assets.  How often do people confuse 
principal with interest? Have you ever invaded princi pal to increase your standard of living, to get 
more golden eggs? The decreasing principal has decr easing power to produce interest or income.  And 
the dwindling capital becomes smaller and smaller un til it no longer supplies even our basic needs. 
   Our most important financial asset is our own ca pacity to earn.  If we don't continually invest in 
improving our own PC, we severely limit our options.  We're locked  into our present situation, 
running scared of our corporation or  our boss's opinion of us, economic ally dependent and defensive.  
Again, it simply isn't effective.    In the human area, the P/PC Balance is equally  fundamental, but even more important, because 
people control physical and financial assets.    When two people in a marriage are more concerne d about getting the golden eggs, the benefits, than 
they are in preserving the relationship that make s them possible, they often become insensitive and 
inconsiderate, neglecting the little kindnesses and cour tesies so important to a deep relationship.  They 
begin to use control levers to manipulate each other,  to focus on their own n eeds, to justify their own 
position and look for evidence to show the wrongness of the other pe rson.  The love, the richness, the 
softness, and spontaneity begin to deteriorate.  The goose gets sicker day by day.    And what about a parent's relationship with  a child? When children are little, they are very 
dependent, very vulnerable.  It becomes so ea sy to neglect the PC work -- the training, the 
communicating, the relating, the listening.  It's easy to take advantage, to manipulate, to get what you 
want the way you want it -- right now! You're bigge r, you're smarter, and you're right! So why not just 
tell them what to do? If necessary, yell at th em, intimidate them, insist on your way. 
   Or you can indulge them.  You can go for the go lden egg of popularity, of pleasing them, giving 
them their way all the time.  Then they grow up without a personal commitment to being disciplined 
or responsible.   
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   Either way -- authoritarian or permissive -- you have the golden egg mentality.  You want to have 
your way or you want to be liked.  But what happens, meantime, to the goose? What sense of 
responsibility, of self-discipline, of confidence in the ability to make good choices or achieve important 
goals is a child going to have a few years down th e road? And what about your relationship? When he 
reaches those critical teenage years, the identity crises , will he know from his experience with you that 
you will listen without judging, that you really, d eeply care about him as a person, that you can be 
trusted, no matter what? Will the relationship be st rong enough for you to reach him, to communicate 
with him, to influence him?    Suppose you want your daughter to have a clean room -- that's P, production, the golden egg.  And 
suppose you want her to clean it -- that's PC, Produc tion Capability.  Your daughter is the goose, the 
asset, that produces the golden egg.    If you have P and PC in balance, she cleans the room cheerfully, without being reminded, because 
she is committed and has the discipline to stay with the commitment.  She is a valuable asset, a goose 
that can produce golden eggs.    But if your paradigm is focused on Production, on getting the room clean, you might find yourself 
nagging her to do it.  You might even escalate your efforts to threatening or yelling, and in your desire 
to get the golden egg, you undermine the health and welfare of the goose. 
   Let me share with you an interesting PC expe rience I had with one of my daughters.  We were 
planning a private date, which is something I enjoy re gularly with each of my children.  We find that 
the anticipation of the date is as satisfying as the realization.    So I approached my daughter and said, "Honey, tonight's your night.  What do you want to do?" 
   "Oh, Dad, that's okay," she replied    "No, really," I said, "What would you like to do?"    "Well," she finally said, "what I want  to do, you don't really want to do." 
   "Really, honey," I said earnestly, "I want to do it.  No matter what, it's your choice." 
   "I want to go see Star Wars," she replied.  "B ut I know you don't like Star Wars.  You slept through 
it before.  You don't like these fa ntasy movies.  That's okay, Dad." 
   "No, honey, if that's what you'd like to do, I'd like to do it."    "Dad, don't worry about it.  We don't always have  to have this date." She paused and then added, 
"But you know why you don't like Star Wars? It's because you don't understand the philosophy and 
training of a Jedi Knight."    " W h a t ? "     "You know the things you teach,  Dad? Those are the same things that  go into the training of a Jedi 
Knight."    "Really? Let's go to Star Wars!"    And we did.  She sat next me and gave me th e paradigm.  I became her student, her learner.  It 
was totally fascinating.  I could begin to see out of  a new paradigm the whole way a Jedi Knight's basic 
philosophy in training is manifest ed in different circumstances. 
   That experience was not a planned P experience; it was the serendipitous fruit of a PC investment.  
It was bonding and very satisfying.  But we enjoyed golden eggs, too, as the goose -- the quality of the 
relationship -- was significantly fed.  Organizational PC     One of the immensely valuable aspects of any correct  principle is that it is valid and applicable in a 
wide variety of circumstances.  Throughout this b ook, I would like to share with you some of the ways 
in which these principles apply to organizations, including families, as well as to individuals.  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   When people fail to respect the P/PC Balance in their use of physical asse ts in organizations, they 
decrease organizational effectiveness and often leave others with dying geese. 
   For example, a person in charge of a physical a sset, such as a machine, may be eager to make a good 
impression on his superiors.  Perhaps the compan y is in a rapid growth stage and promotions are 
coming fast.  So he produces at optimum levels  -- no downtime, no maintenance.  He runs the 
machine day and night.  The production is phen omenal, costs are down, and profits skyrocket.  
Within a short time, he's promoted.  Golden eggs.    But suppose you are his successor on the job.  You inherit a very sick goose, a machine that, by this 
time, is rusted and starts to break down.  You have  to invest heavily in downtime and maintenance.  
Costs skyrocket; profits nose-dive.  And who gets blamed for the loss of golden eggs? You do.  Your 
predecessor liquidated the asset, but the accounting system only reported unit  production, costs, and 
profit.    The P/PC Balance is particularly important as it applies to the human assets  of an organization -- the 
customers and the employees.    I know of a restaurant that served a fantasti c clam chowder and was pack ed with customers every 
day at lunchtime.  Then the business was sold, and the new owner focused on golden eggs -- he 
decided to water down the chowder.  For about a month, with costs down and revenues constant, 
profits zoomed.  But little by little, the customers began to disappear.  Trust was gone, and business 
dwindled to almost nothing.  The new owner tried desperately to reclaim it, but he had neglected the 
customers, violated their trust, and lost the asset of customer loyalty.  There was no more goose to 
produce the golden egg.    There are organizations that talk a lot about th e customer and then completely neglect the people 
that deal with the customer -- the employees.  Th e PC principle is to always treat your employees 
exactly as you want them to treat your best customers.    You can buy a person's hand, but you can't buy his heart.  His heart is where his enthusiasm, his loyalty is.  You can buy his back, but you can't buy his brain.  That's where his creativity is, his 
ingenuity, his resourcefulness.    PC work is treating employees as volunteers just as you treat customers as volunteers, because that's 
what they are.  They volunteer the best part -- their hearts and minds. 
   I was in a group once where someone asked,  "How do you shape up  lazy and incompetent 
employees?" One man responded, "Drop hand grenades !" Several others cheered that kind of macho 
management talk, that "shape up or  ship out" supervision approach. 
   But another person in the group asked, "Who picks up the pieces?"    "No pieces."    "Well, why don't you do that to your customers?" the other man replied.  "Just say, 'Listen, if you're 
not interested in buying, you can just ship out of this place.'"    He said, "You can't do that to customers."    "Well, how come you can do it to employees?"    "Because they're in your employ."    "I see.  Are your employees devoted to you? Do they work hard? How's the turnover?" 
   "Are you kidding? You can't find good people these days.  There's too mu ch turnover, absenteeism, 
moonlighting.  People just don't care anymore."    That focus on golden eggs -- that attitude, th at paradigm -- is totally inadequate to tap into the 
powerful energies of the mind and heart of another person.  A short- term bottom line is important, but 
it isn't all-important.    Effectiveness lies in the balance.  Excessive focu s on P results in ruined health, worn-out machines, 
depleted bank accounts, and broken relationships.  Too much focus on PC is like a person who runs 
for three or four hours a day, bragging about the ext ra 10 years of life it create s, unaware he's spending 
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
them running.  Or a person endlessl y going to school, never producing, living on other people's golden 
eggs -- the eternal student syndrome.    To maintain the P/PC Balance, the balance bet ween the golden egg (Product ion) and the health and 
welfare of the goose (Production Capability) is often a difficult judgment call.  But I suggest it is the 
very essence of effectiveness.  It balances short te rm with long term.  It balances going for the grade 
and paying the price to get an education.  It balanc es the desire to have a room clean and the building 
of a relationship in which the child is internally  committed to do it -- cheerfully, willingly, without 
external supervision.    It's a principle you can see validated in your own life when you burn the cand le at both ends to get 
more golden eggs and wind up sick or exhausted, un able to produce any at all; or when you get a good 
night's sleep and wake up ready to produce throughout the day.    You can see it when you press to get your ow n way with someone and somehow feel an emptiness 
in the relationship; or when you really take time to invest in a relationship and you find the desire and 
ability to work together, to communicate, takes a quantum leap.    The P/PC Balance is the very essence of effectivene ss.  It's validated in every arena of life.  We can 
work with it or against it, but it's there.  It's  a lighthouse.  It's the definition and paradigm of 
effectiveness upon which the Seven Habits in this book are based. 
 How to Use This Book     Before we begin work on the Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, I would like to suggest two 
Paradigm Shifts that will greatly increase the value you will receive from this material.    First, I would recommend that yo u not "see" this material as a book, in the sense that it is something 
to read once and put on a shelf.    You may choose to read it completely through on ce for a sense of the whole.  But the material is 
designed to be a companion in the continual process of change and growth.  It is organized 
incrementally and with suggestions for application at  the end of each habit so that you can study and 
focus on any particular habit as you are ready.    As you progress to deeper levels of understa nding and implementation, you can go back time and 
again to the principles contained in each habit and work to expand your knowledge, skill, and desire. 
   Second, I would suggest that you shift your p aradigm of your own involvement in this material 
from the role of learner to that of teacher.  Take an Inside-Out approach, and read with the purpose in 
mind of sharing or discussing what you learn with  someone else within 48 hours after you learn it. 
   If you had known, for example, that you wo uld be teaching the material on the P/PC Balance 
principle to someone else within 48 hours, would it have made a difference in your reading experience? 
Try it now as you read the final section in this chap ter.  Read as though you are going to teach it to 
your spouse, your child, a business associate, or a fr iend today or tomorrow, while it is still fresh, and 
notice the difference in your mental and emotional process.    I guarantee that if you approach the material in ea ch of the following chapters in this way, you will 
not only better remember what yo u read, but your perspective will be expanded, your understanding 
deepened, and your motivation to  apply the material increased. 
   In addition, as you openly, ho nestly share what you're learning wi th others, you may be surprised to 
find that negative labels or perceptions others may have of you tend to disappear.  Those you teach 
will see you as a changing, growing person, and will be  more inclined to be helpful and supportive as 
you work, perhaps together, to integrate the Seven Habits into your lives.  What You Can Expect  
T H E  S E V E N  H A B I T S  O F  H I G H L Y  E F F E C T I V E  P E O P L E                                     B r o u g h t  t o  y o u  b y  F l y H e a r t  
   In the last analysis, as Marilyn Ferguson obse rved, "No one can persuade another to change.  Each 
of us guards a gate of change that can only be op ened from the inside.  We cannot open the gate of 
another, either by argument or by emotional appeal.    If you decide to open your "gate of change" to really understand and live the principles embodied in 
the Seven Habits, I feel comfortable in assuring you several positive things will happen.    First, your growth with be evolutionary, but the net effect will be revolutionary.  Would you not 
agree that the P/PC Balance principle alone, if fully lived, would transform most individuals and 
organizations?    The net effect of opening the "gate of change" to the first three habits -- the habits of Private Victory 
-- will be significantly increased self-confidence.  You will come to know your self in a deeper, more 
meaningful way -- your nature, your deepest values  and your unique contribution capacity.  As you 
live your values, your sense of identity, integrity,  control, and inner-direct edness will infuse you with 
both exhilaration and peace.  You will define yourself  from within, rather than by people's opinions or 
by comparisons to others.  "Wrong" and "right" will have little to do with being found out. 
   Ironically, you'll find that as you care less abou t what others think of you; you will care more about 
what others think of themselves and their worlds, including their re lationship with you.  You'll no 
longer build your emotional life on other people's we aknesses.  In addition, you'll find it easier and 
more desirable to change because there is something -- so me core deep within -- that is essentially 
changeless.    As you open yourself to the next three habits -- the habits of Public Victory -- you will discover and 
unleash both the desire and the resources to heal  and rebuild important relationships that have 
deteriorated, or even broken.  Good relationship s will improve -- become deeper, more solid, more 
creative, and more adventuresome.    The seventh habit, if deeply internalized, will renew the first six an d will make you truly 
independent and capable of effective interdependenc e.  Through it, you can charge your own batteries. 
   Whatever your present situation, I assure you that you are not your habits.  You can replace old 
patterns of self-defeating behavior with new patte rns, new habits of effectiveness, happiness, and 
trust-based relationships.    With genuine caring, I encourage you to open the gate of change and growth as you study these 
habits.  Be patient with yourself.  Self-growth is  tender; it's holy ground.  There's no greater 
investment.    It's obviously not a quick fix.  But I assure you, you will feel benefits and see immediate payoffs 
that will be encouraging.  In the words of Thomas  Paine, "That which we obta in too easily, we esteem 
too lightly.  It is dearness only which gives everyth ing its value.  Heaven knows how to put a proper 
price on its goods."