The Pomodoro Technique 3 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006 1 The Context 
Who hasn’t experienced time anxiety when faced with  a task that has to be finished by a certain 
deadline? In these circumstances, who hasn’t felt the need to put off that task, to “come up for 
air”? Who hasn’t had that unpleasant sensation of depending on time, chasing after 
appointments, giving up what one loves to do for lack of time? 
“Remember, Time is a greedy player who wi ns without cheating, every round!” writes 
Baudelaire in his poem “The Clock” (1). Is this the true nature of time? Or is it only one of the 
possible ways to consider time? And more generally speaking, why do people have such a 
problem in the way they relate to time? Where does it come from, this anxiety that we’ve all 
experienced at the thought that “time is slipping away”? 
Thinkers, philosophers, scientists – anyone who’s taken on the challenge of attempting 
to define time in and of itself and the relationship between people and time has always been 
forced to admit defeat. Such an inquiry, in fact, is inevitably limited and never complete. Few 
have given us any truly insightful perspectives. For example, according to the work of 
Bergson (3) and Minkowski (16), two profoundly interrelated aspects seem to coexist with 
reference to time: 
! Becoming . An abstract, dimensional aspect of time, which gives rise to the habit of 
measuring time (seconds, minutes, hours); the id ea of representing time on an axis, as we 
would spatial dimensions; the concept of the duration of an event (the distance between two 
points on the temporal axis); the idea of be ing late (once again the distance between two 
points on the temporal axis).  
! The succession of events. A concrete aspect of temporal order: we wake up, we take a 
shower, we have breakfast, we study, we have lunch, we have a nap, we play, we eat, and 
we go to bed. Children come to have this notion of time before they develop the idea of 
abstract time which passes regardless of  the events that take place (16). 
Of these two aspects, it is becoming that generates anxiety – it is, by nature, elusive, 
indefinite, infinite: time passes, slips away, moves toward the future (16). If we try to measure 
ourselves against the passage of time, we feel inadequate, oppressed, enslaved, defeated, more 
and more with every second that goes by. We lose  our élan vital (3), our vital contact, which 
enables us to accomplish things. “Two hours ha ve gone by and I’m still not done; two days 
have gone by and I’m still not done.” In a moment of weakness, the purpose of the activity at 
hand is often no longer even clear. The succession of events, instead, seems to be the less 
anxiety-ridden aspect of time. At times it may ev en represent the regular succession of activity, 
a calm-inducing rhythm. 
 
1.1 Goals of the Pomodoro Technique 
The aim of the Pomodoro Technique is to provide a simple tool/process for improving 
productivity (your own and that of your team) which is able to do the following:   
! Alleviate anxiety linked to becoming  
! Enhance focus and concentration by cutting down on interruptions 
! Increase awareness of your decisions 
! Boost motivation and keep it constant 
! Bolster the determination to achieve your goals 
! Refine the estimation process, both in qualitative and quantitative terms  
! Improve your work or study process 
! Strengthen your determination to keep on applying yourself in the face of complex 
situations 
The Pomodoro Technique 4 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006  
1.2 Basic Assumptions 
The Pomodoro Technique is founded on three basic assumptions:   
! A different way of seeing time (no longer focused on the concept of becoming)  alleviates 
anxiety and in doing so leads to enhanced personal effectiveness. 
! Better use of the mind enables us to achie ve greater clarity of thought, higher 
consciousness, and sharper focus, al l the while facilitating learning. 
! Employing easy-to-use, unobtrusive tools reduces the complexity of applying the 
Technique while favoring continuity, and allows you to concentrate your efforts on the 
activities you want to accomplish. Many time management techniques fail because they 
subject the people who use them to a higher level of added complexity with respect to the 
intrinsic complexity of the task at hand. 
  The primary inspiration for Pomodoro Technique was drawn from the following ideas: 
time-boxing (14), the cognitive techniques described by Buzan, among others, (6, 7, 8) relating 
to how the mind works, and the dynamics of play outlined by Gadamer (10). Notions relating to 
structuring objectives and activities in crementally are detailed in Gilb (11).