The Pomodoro Technique 5 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006 2 Material and Method 
The process underlying the Pomodoro Technique consists of five stages: 
 
What When Why 
Planning at the start of the day to decide on the day’s activities 
Tracking throughout the day to gather raw data on the effort expended and other 
metrics of interest 
Recording at the end of the day to compile an archive of daily observations 
Processing at the end of the day to transform raw data into information 
Visualizing at the end of the day to present the information in a format that facilitates 
understanding and clarifies paths to improvement 
Table 2.1   The Stages of the Pomodoro Technique 
 
Note   The basic iteration of the Pomodoro Technique lasts one day, but it could also be less. In 
this case, the five stages would take place more frequently. 
 
 
Figure 2.1   The Pomodoro 
 
To implement the Pomodoro Technique, all you need is the following: 
! A Pomodoro: a kitchen timer (fig. 2.1) 
! A To Do Today Sheet (Appendix 2), filled in at the start of each day with the following:  
! A heading with place, date, and author 
! A list of the things to do during the day, in order of priority  
! A section labelled Unplanned & Urgent Activities where any unexpected tasks 
that have to be dealt with should be listed as they come up. These activities 
could potentially modify the day’s plan. 
! An Activity Inventory Sheet (Appendix 3), consisting of: 
! A heading with the name of the author 
! A number of lines where various activities are noted down as they come up. At 
the end of the day, the ones that ha ve been completed are checked off.  
! A Records Sheet: This is the set of raw data needed to produce pertinent reports and 
graphics. Depending on the objectives in questio n, this contains different sets of boxes. 
Normally, this sheet would include the date, description, and the number of Pomodoros 
worth of effort needed to accomplish a task. This sheet is updated at least once a day, 
usually at the end of the day. 
In the simple examples shown in this paper,  the Recording, Processing and Visualizing 
stages are done directly on the Records Sheet. 
The Pomodoro Technique 6 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006  
 
Note   Due to typographical constraints, the sheets used in this paper only show the entries 
relating to the topic in question. Simple models of the sheets described here are provided in the 
Appendices, and can be used to practice the Technique. 
 
An evolutionary approach to the use of the Pomodoro Technique is provided below, 
oriented toward a progressive experimentation of  the Technique itself. Clearly, the incremental 
nature of the Technique means the objectives sh ould be achieved in the order they are given 
here. 
2.1 Objective I: Find Out How Much Effort an Activity 
Requires 
The traditional Pomodoro is 30 minutes long: 25 mi nutes of work plus a 5-minute break.  At the 
beginning of each day, choose the tasks you wa nt to tackle from the Activity Inventory Sheet, 
prioritize them, and write them down in the To Do Today Sheet (Fig. 2.2). 
 
 TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Mark Ross 
 W r i t e  a r t i c l e  o n  How to Learn Music  (max 10 pps)  
 Finetune How to Learn Music  by reading it out loud  
 Condense How to Learn Music  to 3 pps  
Figure 2.2    To Do Today Sheet  
2.1.1  Start the First Pomodoro 
Set the Pomodoro for 25 minutes and start the first activity on the To Do Today Sheet. Whoever 
is using the Pomodoro, whether one person or more than one, should always be able to clearly 
see how much time is left (fig. 2.3). 
 
Figure 2.3    The Pomodoro: The time remaining should always be visible.  
 
A Pomodoro can’t be interrupted; it marks 25 minutes of pure work. A Pomodoro can’t 
be split up; there is no such thing as half of a Pomodoro or a quarter of a Pomodoro. The atomic 
unit of time is a Pomodoro. (Rule: A Pomodoro Is Indivisible.) If a Pomodoro is definitively 
interrupted by someone or something, that Pom odoro should be considered void, as if it had 
never been set; then you should make a fresh start with a new Pomodoro. When the Pomodoro 
rings, mark an X next to the activity you’ve been working on and take a break for 3-5 minutes. 
 
 TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Mark Ross 
 Write the article on How to Learn Music  (max 10 pps) ! 
 Finetune How to Learn Music  by reading it out loud  
 Condense How to Learn Music  down to 3 pps  
Figure 2.4    To Do Today Sheet: the first Pomodoro.  
 
When the Pomodoro rings, this signals that the current activity is peremptorily (though 
temporarily) finished. You’re not allowed to keep on working “just for a few more minutes”, 
even if you’re convinced that in those few minutes you could complete the task at hand. 
The 3-5 minute break gives you the time you need to “disconnect” from your work. 
This allows the mind to assimilate what’s been learned in the last 25 minutes, and also provides 
The Pomodoro Technique 7 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006 you with the chance to do something good for your health, which will help you to do your best 
during the next Pomodoro. During this break you can stand up and walk around the room, have 
a drink of water, or fantasize about where you’ll go on your next vacation. You can do some 
deep breathing or stretching exercises. If you work with other people, you can swap a joke or 
two, and so on.    
During this quick break, it’s not a good idea to engage in activities that call for any 
significant mental effort. For example, don’t start talking about work-related issues with a 
colleague; don’t write important emails or make imperative phone calls, etc. Doing these kinds 
of things would block the constructive mental inte gration that you need in order to feel alert and 
ready for the start of the next Pomodoro. You should include these activities in your Activity 
Inventory, and earmark specific Pomodoros to do  them. Clearly, during this break you shouldn’t 
continue thinking about what you’ve done durin g the last Pomodoros.  Once the break is over, 
set the Pomodoro to 25 minutes and continue the activity at hand until the next time it rings. 
Then mark another X on the To Do Today Sheet (fig. 2.5). 
 
 TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Mark Ross 
 Write the article on How to Learn Music  (max 10 pps) !! 
 Finetune How to Learn Music  by reading it out loud  
 Condense How to Learn Music down to 3 pps  
Figure 2.5    To Do Today Sheet: The second Pomodoro.  
 
Next comes the 3-5 minute break, and then a new Pomodoro. 
2.1.2  Every Four Pomodoros 
Every four Pomodoros, stop the activity you’re wo rking on and take a longer break, from 15 to 
30 minutes. 
  
 TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Mark Ross 
 Write the article on How to Learn Music  (max 10 pps) !!!!   
 Finetune How to Learn Music  by reading it out loud  
 Condense How to Learn Music  down to 3 pps   
Figure 2.6    To Do Today Sheet: The end of the first set of Pomodoros.  
 
The 15-30 minute break is the ideal opportunity to tidy up your desk, take a trip to the 
coffee machine, listen to voice mail, check incoming emails, or simply rest and do breathing 
exercises or take a quick walk. The important thing is not to do anything complex, otherwise 
your mind won’t be able to reorganize and integr ate what you’ve learned, and as a result you 
won’t be able to give the next  Pomodoro your best effort. Obvi ously, during this break too you 
need to stop thinking about what you did during the last Pomodoros. 
2.1.3  Completing an Activity 
Keep on working, Pomodoro after Pomodoro, until the task at hand is finished, and then cross it 
out on the To Do Today Sheet (fig. 2.7). 
 
 TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Mark Ross 
 W r i t e  a r t i c l e  o n  How to Learn Music (max 10 pps)  !!!!!  
 Finetune How to Learn Music  by reading it out loud  
 Condense How to Learn Music  down to 3 pps  
Figure 2.7    To Do Today Sheet: Completing an activity.  
 
Specific cases should be handled with common sense: 
! If you finish a task while the Pomodoro is still ticking, the following rule applies: If a 
Pomodoro Begins, It Has to Ring. It’s a good idea to take advantage of the opportunity for 
overlearning  (17), using the remaining portion of the Pomodoro to review or repeat what 
The Pomodoro Technique 8 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006 you’ve done, make small improvements, and note down what you’ve learned until the 
Pomodoro rings. 
! If you finish an activity in the first five minutes of the Pomodoro and you feel like the task 
was actually already finished during the previous Pomodoro and revision wouldn’t be 
worthwhile, as an exception to the rule the current Pomodoro doesn’t have to be included in 
the Pomodoro count.  
Once the current activity has been successfully completed, move on to the next one on your list, 
then the next, taking breaks between every Pomodoro and every four Pomodoros (fig. 2.8) 
 
 TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Mark Ross 
 W r i t e  a r t i c l e  o n  How to Learn Music  (max 10 pps)  !!!!!  
 Finetune How to Learn Music  by reading it out loud  !! 
 C ondense How to Learn Music  down to 3 pps !!! 
Figure 2.8    To Do Today: Completing several activities.  
2.1.4  Recording 
At the end of every day, the completed Pomodoros can be transferred in a hard-copy archive. 
As an alternative, it may be more convenient to use an electronic spreadsheet or a database, and 
delete the completed activities from the Activity Inventory Sheet.  
What you track and record depends on what you want to observe and the kind of 
reports that you want to generate. The initial aim of tracking and later recording could simply be 
to present a report with the number of Pomodoros completed per task. In other words, you may 
want to show the effort expended to accomplish each activity. To do so, the following boxes 
can be used: the date, start time, type of activity, description of the activity, the actual number 
of Pomodoros, a short note on the results achieved, and possible room for improvement, or 
problems that may have come up (fig. 2.9). This initial recording model actually represents the 
report you want.  It’s easy to draw up, even on paper.  
 
RECORDS Marco Rossi 
Date Time Type Activity Actual Pomodoros  Notes 
12 July 
2006 08:30 Writing How to Learn Music 5 7 pps 
12 July 
2006 11:30 Finetuning How to Learn Music 2  
12 July 
2006 14:00 Condensing How to Learn Music 3 from 7 to 3 
pps 
Figure 2.9    Records Sheet  
 
How did Marco fill in the time he began an activity if he didn’t track it? With the 
Pomodoro Technique, it’s not essential to track the start time for an activity (or for every 
Pomodoro). What’s important is to track the numb er of Pomodoros actually completed: the real 
effort. This point is the key to fully understanding the Pomodoro Technique. Since tracking is 
done at least once a day, remembering and reconstructing the start times for activities isn’t 
difficult; in fact, this kind of recall is a beneficial mental exercise. 
 
Note    A useful technique for remembering start times is to do a rundown of the day beginning 
with the most recent activity and moving backwards to the first one. 
  
2.1.5  Improvement 
Recording provides an effective tool for people who apply the Pomodoro Technique in terms of 
self-observation and decision-making aimed at process improvement. For example, you can ask 
yourself how many Pomodoros a week you spend on work activities and on explorative 
activities, or how many Pomodoros you do on an average day of the week, etc. You can also 
The Pomodoro Technique 9 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006 ascertain if the stages in the pr ocess are all effective, or if one could be eliminated while still 
achieving the same results. 
For instance, we can see in Figure 2.9 that it took Mark ten Pomodoros to write, 
finetune, and condense the article How to Learn Music. That seems like too many. Mark would 
really like to get the same result with nine Pomodoros or less. Then he would have one or more 
Pomodoros for free time for other activities. “I’d like to try to write the next article with the 
same quality and less effort. How? What should I cut out? What activities are really useful? 
How can I reorganize them to be more effective?” This is the type of question that enables 
people to improve, or at least to try to improve, their work or study processes. At the end of the 
day, the activity of recording and later looking for ways to improve should not take more than 
one Pomodoro. 
2.1.6  The Nature of the Pomodoro 
The Pomodoro marks the passage of time, and so it is itself a measure of the dimension of time. 
It becomes a measure of the dimension of effort wh en it is combined with the number of people 
involved in an activity. Depending on this number, we can say that a given task was 
accomplished with a certain number of Person Pomodoros or Pair Pomodoros or Team 
Pomodoros, where these units measure effort. The quantities of effort relative to different 
numbers of people are not homogeneous; they can’t  be added together or compared with one 
another. The work of an individual, a pair or a group represents a different way of combining 
production factors and also diverse means of  c o m m u n i c a t i o n .  T h e r e  a r e  n o  f o r m u l a s  f o r  
converting Person Pomodoros to Pa ir Pomodoros or Team Pomodoros. 
 
Note   Let’s say we want to measure the cost of an activity performed by more than one person, 
either individually, in pairs, or in teams. By  applying a monetary measurement it’s clear we can 
compare and add up the different amounts of effort. For example, let’s take an activity that’s 
achieved by the effort of 2 Person Pomodoros and 3 Pair Pomodoros. In terms of effort, these 
amounts can not be directly compared or summed in any way. However, by assigning a 
monetary value for the effort of one Pomodoro, for example €10.00, we can actually say that the 
activity costs 2 x € 10.00+ 3 x 2 x € 10.00 = € 80.00. 
  
 
Nota   The paper Applying the Pomodoro Technique in Teams  explains how to track and record 
pair or group work. 
 
2.2 Objective II: Cut Down on Interruptions 
The length of a Pomodoro, 25 minutes, seems short enough to make it possible to resist being 
distracted by various kinds of interruptions. But experience shows that once you’ve started 
using the Pomodoro Technique, interruptions can become a real problem. That’s why an 
effective strategy is needed for minimizing unhandled interruptions and progressively 
increasing the number of Pomodoros that can be accomplished consistently without 
interruptions. There are two kinds of interruptions: internal and external. 
2.2.1  Internal Interrupti ons – We Interrupt Ourselves 
Even though a Pomodoro only lasts 25 minutes, it won’t be easy for everyone to finish the first 
few Pomodoros without giving in to some immediate need to interrupt the activity at hand: the 
need to stand up and get something to eat or drink, or to make a call that suddenly seems 
terribly urgent, or to look up something on the Internet this minute (it may be related or 
unrelated to the task at hand) or to check email this instant. Lastly, we might even need to 
rethink how we’ve prioritized this particular activity; we’re constantly second-guessing our 
daily planning or our decisions. 
These kinds of distractions, or ways to procrastinate on the activity at hand, are called 
internal interruptions. They generally disguise our fear of not being able to finish what we’re 
working on the way we want and when we want. Internal interruptions are often associated with 
having little ability to concentrate. 
How can we free ourselves from these internal interruptions? 
We have to work on two fronts simultaneously: 
The Pomodoro Technique 10 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006 ! Make these interruptions clearly visible. Every time you feel a potential interruption 
coming on, put an apostrophe (‘) on the sheet where you record your Pomodoros. Then do 
one of the following:  
! Write down the new activity on the To Do Today Sheet under Unplanned & Urgent 
if you think it’s imminent and can’t be put off. 
! Write it down in the Activity Inventory, marking it with a “U” (unplanned); add a 
deadline if need be.  
! Intensify your determination to finish the current Pomodoro. Once you’ve marked down the 
apostrophe, continue working on the given task till the Pomodoro rings. (Rule: Once a 
Pomodoro Begins, It Has to Ring.) 
The aim is to accept the fact that needs do emerge, and they shouldn’t be neglected. 
Look at them objectively and if possible reschedule them for another time. 
2.2.2  Scenario 
An example will help clarify the dynamic of ha ndling internal interrupt ions. During the second 
Pomodoro for writing the article on How to Learn Music, Mark suddenly feels he has to call his 
friend Carol to find out when his favorite rock group is having its next concert. Mark asks 
himself: “Is this really urgent? Do I have to do it today? No, I can put it off. Maybe an hour or 
two. Maybe even until tomorrow!” Mark puts an apostrophe on the To Do Today Sheet next to 
the current activity (fig. 2.10), adds an item to the Activity Inventory for unplanned activities 
(marked with a “U” – fig. 2.11) and continues with the Pomodoro.  
 
 TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Mark Ross 
 
Write article on How to Learn Music  (max 10 pps) ’  
! 
 Finetune How to Learn Music by reading it out loud   
  Condense How to Learn Music  to 3 pps  
Figure 2.10    To Do Today Sheet: An internal interruption.  
 
 ACTIVITY INVENTORY Mark Ross 
 …   
N Call Carol: When’s the next rock concert?  
 …   
Figure 2.11    Activity Inventory Sheet: An unplanned activity.  
 
Then Mark asks himself: “Does this activity have to be done by tomorrow? No, it just 
has to be done by the end of the week.” Mark adds this deadline in brackets next to the “U” (fig. 
2.12). 
 
 ACTIVITY INVENTORY Mark Ross 
 …   
N  
[14July] Call Carol: When’s the next rock concert?  
 …   
Figure 2.12    Activity Inventory Sheet: An unplanned activity with a deadline.  
 
If Mark gets a sudden craving for a pizza 10 minutes later, he’ll mark down another 
apostrophe but this time he’ll note this activity on the To Do Today Sheet under Unplanned & 
Urgent  (fig. 2.13). Then Mark continues with his Pomodoro.  
 
The Pomodoro Technique 11 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006  TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Mark Ross 
 
Write article on How to Learn Music  (max 10 pps) ’ ’  
! 
 Finetune How to Learn Music by reading it out loud  
  Condense How to Learn Music to 3 pps  
   
 UNPLANNED & URGENT   
 Order a pizza  
Figure 2.13    To Do Today Sheet: An urgent internal interruption.  
 
Up to this point, the Pomodoro hasn’t been interrupted. It’s kept on ticking and Mark 
has continued working, dealing with interruptions. Clearly, as little time as possible should be 
spent dealing with interruptions, a few seconds at most. Otherwise the Pomodoro has to be 
considered interrupted, or void. Finally the Pomodoro rings. Mark records it with an “X” and 
takes a quick break (fig. 2.14) 
 
 TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Mark Ross 
 
Write article on How to Learn Music  (max 10 pps) ’ ’  
!!  
 Finetune How to Learn Music  by reading it out loud  
  Condense How to Learn Music  to 3 pps  
   
 UNPLANNED & URGENT   
 Order a pizza  
Figure 2.14    To Do Today Sheet: Urgent internal interruption, second Pomodoro.  
 
When does Mark order the pizza? Depending on the level of urgency he perceives, 
Mark can opt to call his favorite pizza place righ t away and order the pizza, or wait until the end 
of a four-Pomodoro session. In any case, the urge ncy is clearly visible. Mark decides to move 
on to the next Pomodoro. Eight potential interruptions await Mark during the third Pomodoro, 
but fortunately he deals with them all: he classifies one activity as not urgent and records it in 
the Activity Inventory; Mark has no other choice but to categorize the other interruptions as 
urgent (fig.2.15).  
 
 TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Mark Ross 
 
Write article on How to Learn Music  (max 10 pps) ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ 
!! 
 Finetune How to Learn Music  by reading it out loud  
  Condense How to Learn Music  to 3 pps  
   
 UNPLANNED & URGENT  
 Order a pizza  
 Choose a bike to buy  
 Read article on learning music in Asia   
 Look for July jazz happenings in Rome on Internet  
 C h e c k  e m a i l   
 O r d e r  C h i n e s e  t a k e o u t   
 Tidy up desk drawers  
 Sharpen pencils  
Figure 2.15    To Do Today Sheet: Several urgent internal interruptions.  
 
The urgency of the activities listed above might make some people smile. But that’s 
how Mark perceives them. The point to emphasize here is that with the Pomodoro Technique, 
lots of useful or fun things to do come up, but we make a conscious decision not to do them 
right away during the current Pomodoro. Reading through the various activities and the urgency 
we assign to each, we can see how much our mind is moving, and how hard it is to keep it still 
and focus on the activity at hand. Often the number and variety of attempted internal 
interruptions are symptoms of our fear of failure in completing the task at hand.  
The Pomodoro Technique 12 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006 It should come as no surprise that many of these distractions later prove to be anything 
but urgent, even to the person who wrote them down. Most likely at the end of the Pomodoro or 
the activity or the day, several items marked urgent or absolute priority will be handled in 
different ways.  
! They’ll be moved to the Activity Inventory. Maybe we can pick out a bike tomorrow. 
! They’ll be done during longer breaks. That’s the time to look up jazz concerts in Rome in 
July, for example. 
! They’ll be deleted. Does Mark really want to order a pizza along with spring rolls and 
Peking duck? He might even realize he doesn’t want to order anything and he’ll eat at the 
end of the day. 
It’s a different mind that reads over those items at the end of a Pomodoro, or a set of 
four, or at the end of the day, and it’s some times surprising. Truly urgent tasks are always 
highlighted on the To Do Today Sheet. The aim of the Pomodoro Technique is to ensure that 
the current Pomodoro isn’t interrupted by these activities. Instead, the following options are 
available:  
! They can be done during the next Pomodoro (but still measured by a Pomodoro), in place 
of other activities. 
! They can be re-scheduled sometime during the day, in place of other activities. 
! They can be moved from Pomodoro to Pomodoro if possible till the end of the day. This 
helps us gradually learn to recognize what’s really urgent. 
If and when unplanned urgent activities are done during the day, the relative 
Pomodoros are marked down in the proper space (fig. 2.16). In all the cases discussed so far, the 
interruptions can be considered handled. Note that the mechanism for handling interruptions 
consists of inverting the dependency on internal interruptions, and consequently making these 
interruptions depend on the Pomodoros we decide to slot them into.  
 
 TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Mark Ross 
 
Write article on How to Learn Music  (max 10 pps) ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ 
!! 
 Finetune How to Learn Music  by reading it out loud  
  Condense How to Learn Music to 3 pps  
   
 UNPLANNED & URGENT   
 Order a pizza  
 Choose a bike to buy  
 Read article on learning music in Asia  ! 
 Look for jazz happenings in July in Rome on Internet  
 C h e c k  e m a i l   
 O r d e r  C h i n e s e  t a k e o u t   
 Tidy up desk drawers  
 Sharpen pencils  
Figure 2.16   To Do Today Sheet: Unplanned activity done during the day.  
 
  
If you have to interrupt a Pomodoro, either because you give in to temptation or 
something really urgent comes up, there’s only one thing to do: void the current Pomodoro, 
even if it’s about to ring. (Rule: A Pomodoro Is Indivisible.) Then mark down an apostrophe 
where Pomodoros are recorded to keep track of  the interrupted Pomodoro. Obviously, you can’t 
mark the unfinished Pomodoro - which didn’t actually ring - with an X.  So, take a 5-minute 
break and start with a new Pomodoro. 
The Next Pomodoro Will Go Better. 
 
The first objective to achieve in cutting down on interruptions is to be aware of the number and 
type of internal interruptions. Observe them, accept them, and schedule them or delete them, as 
the case may be.  
The Pomodoro Technique 13 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006 2.2.3  External Interruptions – We’re Interrupted by Others 
People who work in social environments can be interrupted: your study partner asks you to 
explain a paragraph or suggests going to a movie after dinner; a phone call doesn’t get 
effectively filtered by the secretary; a colleag ue asks you how to compile a report; an email 
program constantly beeps every time a new message comes in. What should you do? 
External interruptions call for the ability to “protect” the ticking Pomodoro. Up till now 
a major effort has been made to eliminate internal interruptions. Now the risk is that someone 
on the outside prevents you from having the pleasure of marking an X on your To Do Today 
Sheet. 
The main difference between internal and external interruptions is that with the latter 
we need to interact with other people: we need to communicate. The mechanism for dealing 
with external interruptions is the same as that for internal ones: invert the dependency on 
interruptions, and make the interruptions depend on us. 
A few examples are helpful to clarify what  w e  a c t u a l l y  n e e d  t o d o .  I n c o m i n g  p h o n e  
calls can always be taken by the answering machine and messages listened to later. Emails can 
keep coming in without distracting our attention simply by deactivating acoustic signals for 
incoming messages. If a colleague or study partner comes over, you can politely say you’re 
busy and can’t be interrupted. (Some people use the humorous expression “I’m in the middle of 
a Pomodoro.”) Then tell the person that you’d rather call them back in 25 minutes, or in a few 
hours, or tomorrow, depending on how urgent and important the matter is.  
Speaking from experience, true emergencies that need to be dealt with instantly are rare 
in real life. A 25-minute or 2-hour delay (four  Pomodoros) is almost  always possible for 
activities that are commonly cons idered urgent. This delay isn’t usually detrimental to the 
person who wants to communicate with you, but gives you an enormous advantage in terms of 
making your mind work effectively, finishing activities the way you want to and rescheduling 
urgent tasks. With practice, you’ll come to real ize how often apparently urgent activities can 
even be postponed till the following day while still satisfying the person making the request.  
So, Protect the Pomodoro means: inform effectively, negotiate quickly to reschedule 
the interruption, and call back the person who interrupted you as agreed. The Inform, Negotiate, 
Call Back Strategy enables you to control external interruptions by simply rescheduling them in 
a later Pomodoro the same day or another day according to the degree of urgency. The 
dependency inversion for interruptions lies in this mechanism: We’re no longer dependent on 
interruptions, interruptions depend on us (i.e. the Pomodoros we allocate for calling back). 
The feedback from people who start applying the Pomodoro Technique is often the 
same: they discover they can have up to 10 or even 15 external interruptions during a single 
Pomodoro (25 minutes). If the people doing the interrupting learn that you’ll really call them 
back, and you’re not just putting them off, it won’t take long to see our habitual interrupters 
actually protecting the Pomodoro too. Many people who work with Pomodoro users say they 
have the feeling they’re working or studying with people who know how to appreciate the value 
of their own time. In operational terms, handling this type of interruption is like dealing with 
internal interruptions. In this case, too, we work on two fronts simultaneously: 
! Make these interruptions clearly visible. Every time someone or something tries to interrupt 
a Pomodoro, put a dash (-) on the sheet where you record your Pomodoros, apply the 
Inform, Negotiate, and Call Strategy. Then do one of the following: 
! Write down the new activity on the To Do Today Sheet under Unplanned & Urgent 
if it has to be done today, adding the promised deadline in brackets in the left-hand 
margin. 
! Write it down in the Activity Inventory, marking it with a “U” (unplanned); add a 
deadline in brackets if need be.  
! Intensify your determination to finish the current Pomodoro. Once you’ve marked down the 
dash, continue working on the given task till the Pomodoro rings.  
 
This way, you’ll achieve the objective of  remembering the commitment you made, as 
well as measuring daily external interruptions, without interrupting the Pomodoro. The example 
below shows two external interruptions handled in different ways during the second Pomodoro 
of Write an Article on How to Learn Music  (fig. 2.17 and 2.18). 
 
The Pomodoro Technique 14 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006  TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Mark Ross 
 
Write article on How to Learn Music  (max 10 pps) - - 
! 
 Finetune How to Learn Music  by reading it out loud  
  Condense How to Learn Music  to 3 pps  
   
 UNPLANNED & URGENT:  
[15.40] Email draft of article to Luke  
Figura 2.17    Things To Do Today Sheet: An unplanned urgent activity.  
 
 ACTIVITY INVENTORY Mark Ross 
 …   
U[13July] Make an appointment with Maestro Neri for interview  
 …   
Figure 2.18    Activity Inventory Sheet: An unplanned activity with a deadline.  
 
If a Pomodoro absolutely has to be interrupted, either due to human weakness or for a 
real emergency, there’s only one thing to do: void the current Pomodoro, even if it’s about to 
ring. (Rule: A Pomodoro is Indivisible.) Then put a dash where you record Pomodoros to keep 
track of interrupted Pomodoros, and record the description and the deadline for the activity in 
the Unplanned & Urgent section. Then start the first Pomodoro for the urgent activity.  
The Next Pomodoro Will Go Better. 
 
The second objective to achieve in order to cut down on interruptions is to be aware of 
the number and type of external interruptions. Negotiate them and reschedule them depending 
on the real degree of urgency. 
2.2.4  Systematic Interruptions 
When applying the Pomodoro Technique, the first tangible consequence of having to 
systematically deal with internal and external interruptions is that Pomodoros earmarked for 
organizational activities emerge (emails, phone cal ls, meetings, etc.). The most natural and most 
common decision is to set aside one Pomodoro a day (or more if need be) to take care of urgent 
interruptions. The dependency inversion mechanism applied to protect the current Pomodoro 
actually serves to turn interruptions into Pomodoros dedicated to forms of communication. We 
should emphasize that Pomodoro users have the following objectives: 
! To successfully delay these Pomodoros as far as possible, downgrading the degree of 
apparent urgency and incrementing the extent to which these activities can be controlled 
and scheduled 
! To gradually cut down on the number of Pomodoros used for organizing the interruptions 
that come up throughout the day 
People who start applying the Pomodoro Technique are always amazed when they 
measure the Pomodoros spent on work and study (without unhandled interruptions) and those 
used for organizational activities (which in part come from dealing with interruptions). In some 
teams, members start off with no more than 2-3 Pomodoros actually dedicated to work per day 
per person; the remaining Pomodoros are spent on meetings, phone calls, and emails. 
2.2.5  Recording: Qualitative Estimation Errors in Planning 
Look at the activities recorded daily and marked  with a “U” in the Activity Inventory, and the 
ones marked Unplanned & Urgent on the To Do Today Sheet. By doing so, during the planning 
phase you can assess your ability to identify the number and type of activity that’s most 
effective in reaching a given obje ctive. The greater the number of unplanned activities involved, 
the greater the qualitative error in your initia l estimate. So, you can measure the unplanned 
activities done to attain a certain objective. Clearly, you can also include the total number of 
internal and external interruptions on the Records Sheet to observe them and try to minimize 
them over time. 
The Pomodoro Technique 15 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006 2.3 Objective III: Estimate the Effort for Activities 
Once you’ve begun to master the technique and y ou’ve reached the first two objectives, you can 
start working on quantitative estimates. The long-term objective here is to successfully predict 
the effort that an activity requires.  
The Activity Inventory lists all the activities that need to be done. These tasks come 
from planning, which is needed to identify ways to reach your objectives  (for example, at the 
beginning of a project) and to deal with interruptions. Some activities lose their purpose over 
time, so they can be deleted from the Inventory. 
 A t  t h e  s t a r t  o f  e a c h  d a y ,  e s t i m a t e  h o w  m a n y  P o m o d o r o s  e a c h  a c t i v i t y  i n  t h e  I n v e n t o r y  
will take. Revise previous estimates, if need be. Record the estimated number of Pomodoros on 
the relative line (fig. 2.19). The Pomodoro estimate actually represents the number of 
Pomodoros needed for a certain number of people to accomplish an activity. So, this is a 
measure of effort. However, in the simple ex amples that follow, the number of Pomodoros 
always refers to one person. 
 
 ACTIVITY INVENTORY Lucy Banks 
 …   
 Answer questions on thermodynamics in Ch 4 2 
 Repeat laws of thermodynamics out loud to Mark  3 
 S u m m a r i z e  l a w s  o f  t h e r m o d y n a m i c s  i n  w r i t i n g   3  
 Call Laura: invite her to the seminar on thermodynamics  
 C a l l  M a r k :  g i v e  m e  m y  l a p t o p  b a c k  s o o n !    
 Call Andrew: buy tickets to concert?  
 Email Nick: how do you do ex. 2, p. 24?  
 …   
Figure 2.19    Activity Inventory Sheet: Daily estimate.  
 
Estimates must always be based on complete  Pomodoros, so figures like 5 ½ Pomodoro 
aren’t allowed. In this case, count 6 Pomodoros . If an estimate is greater than 5-7 Pomodoros, 
this means that the activity in question is too complex. It’s better to break it down into several 
activities; estimate these activities separately, and write them down on several lines in the 
Activity Inventory. The rule is: If It Takes More Than 5-7 Pomodoros, Break It Down. By 
doing so, not only do single activities become less complex, but estimates are also more 
accurate. This effect is magnified when the breakdown involves incr emental activities, not 
simply smaller activities. (Incremental activities deliver a little bit of value at a time.) 
If the estimate is less than one Pomodoro (e.g. the time it takes to call Laura to invite 
her to the thermodynamics seminar, or to call Mark to ask him to give back the laptop), similar 
activities should be combined till they add up to one Pomodoro of effort. The rule is: If It Takes 
Less Than One Pomodoro, Add It Up.  So, there are two options for activities estimated to last 
less than one Pomodoro. 
! Find and combine similar activities from the Activity Inventory until they add up to one 
Pomodoro of effort (fig 2.20). 
! Leave the activity without an estimate and indicate that you’ll combine it with another 
activity when you fill in the To Do Today Sheet. 
 
The Pomodoro Technique 16 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006  ACTIVITY INVENTORY Lucy Banks 
 …   
 Answer questions on thermodynamics in Ch 4 2 
 Repeat laws of thermodynamics out loud to Mark 3 
 S u m m a r i z e  l a w s  o f  t h e r m o d y n a m i c s  i n  w r i t i n g  3  
 Call Laura: invite her to the seminar on thermodynamics  
 C a l l  M a r k :  g i v e  m e  m y  l a p t o p  b a c k  s o o n !  +   
Call Andrew: buy tickets to concert?  1 
 Email Nick: how do you do ex. 2, p. 24?  
 …   
Figure 2.20     Activity Inventory Sheet: Activities estimated at less than one Pomodoro.  
 
In choosing one of the two possible strategies, remember that one of the functions of 
the Activity Inventory is to facilitate the choice of activities To Do Today. Take the first option 
if the activities in question are very similar or complementary; leave the other tasks without an 
estimate and combine them later. In any case, the greater the number of useful activities you 
have in the Activity Inventory, the simpler it will be to choose which strategy to use and how to 
combine the various tasks. 
 
Note    Any changes to the Activity Inventory can be made with a good pencil and an excellent 
eraser. 
 
2.3.1  Available Pomodoros 
Now that you have an estimate of the number of Pomodoros for each activity, you can decide to 
put together a set of activities that doesn’t exceed the number of Pomodoros available in a day. 
Record these Available Pomodoros on the To Do Today Sheet; you would normally do so 
before actually listing the things to do. Figure 2.21 shows an example of eight Pomodoros 
available on July 12. Then, pick out the tasks to do for the day, combining activities if 
necessary. (Rule: If It Lasts Less Than One Pomodoro, Add It Up.) Write the activities you’ve 
chosen in order of priority on the To Do T oday Sheet. For each one, every estimated Pomodoro 
is represented by an empty box (fig. 2.21). 
 
 TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Lucy Banks  
Available Pomodoros: 8  
 Answer questions on thermodynamics in Ch 4 "" 
 Repeat laws of thermodynamics out loud to Mark """  
 S u m m a r i z e  l a w s  o f  t h e r m o d y n a m i c s  i n  w r i t i n g  """  
Figure 2.21    To Do Today Sheet: Estimated Pomodoros.  
 
There’s no point in adding activities beyond the total estimated eight Pomodoros. If the 
number of estimated Pomodoros is higher than the number of Pomodoros actually needed to 
complete the activities, the remaining number of Pomodoros can only be considered once 
you’re finished. Then you can choose tasks from the Inventory to fill in that extra time.  
2.3.2  Possible Scenarios 
Set the timer, and as always, begin with the first activity on your list. Every time the Pomodoro 
rings, put an X in the first empty box (fig. 2.22). 
 
The Pomodoro Technique 17 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006  TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Lucy Banks  
Available Pomodoros: 8  
 Answer questions on thermodynamics in Ch 4 #" 
 Repeat laws of thermodynamics out loud to Mark """  
 S u m m a r i z e  l a w s  o f  t h e r m o d y n a m i c s  i n  w r i t i n g  """  
Figure 2.22    To Do Today Sheet: First Pomodoro estimated and accomplished.  
 
If you finish the activity in the exact number of estimated Pomodoros, cross out the 
description of the activity as in Figure 2.23. 
 
 TO DO TODAY Roma, 12 July 2006 
Lucy Banks  
Available Pomodoros: 8  
 Answer questions on thermodynamics in Ch 4  ## 
 Repeat laws of thermodynamics out loud to Mark """  
 S u m m a r i z e  l a w s  o f  t h e r m o d y n a m i c s  i n  w r i t i n g  """  
Figure 2.23    To Do Today Sheet: Activities done in the exact number of estimated Pomodoros.  
 
If you finish the activity in fewer Pomodoros than you estimated (overestimation error), 
again, cross out the description of the activity (fig. 2.24). 
 
 THINGS TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Lucy Banks  
Available 
Pomodoros: 8  
 Answer questions on thermodynamics in Ch 4  ## 
 Repeat laws of thermodynamics out loud to Mark  ##"  
 S u m m a r i z e  l a w s  o f  t h e r m o d y n a m i c s  i n  w r i t i n g  """  
Figure 2.24    To Do Today Sheet: Underestimation.  
 
If you’ve used up the estimated Pomodoros and you still need more Pomodoros to 
finish the task you’re working on (quantitative underestimation error), you can do one of two 
things: 
! Continue and mark down the next Pomodoros without taking into account new estimates. 
Below is an example of a case where another Pomodoro is needed to complete an activity 
(fig. 2.25).  
 
 TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Lucy Banks  
Available Pomodoros: 8  
 A n s w e r  questions on thermodynamics in Ch 4  ## 
 Repeat laws of thermodynamics out loud to Mark  ##"  
 S u m m a r i z e  l a w s  o f  T h e r m o d y n a m i c s  i n  w r i t i n g  ###!  
Figure 2.25    To Do Today Sheet: Overestimation.  
 
! Make a new estimate, in Pomodoros, and mark these new estimated Pomorodos to the right 
of the last estimated and completed Pomodoro using a different color or shape. This way, 
you can highlight the need for second or third estimates and verify relative error (fig. 2.26). 
 
The Pomodoro Technique 18 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006  TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Lucy Banks  
Available 
Pomodoros: 8  
 Answer questions on thermodynamics in Ch 4  ## 
 Repeat laws of thermodynamics out loud to Mark  ##"  
 S u m m a r i z e  l a w s  o f  t h e r m o d y n a m i c s  i n  w r i t i n g  ###$$  
Figure 2.26    To Do Today Sheet: Second estimate.  
 
As you can see from Figure 2.27, the summary took Lucy four Pomodoros, three of 
which were originally estimated (underestimation) and only one of the two estimated later 
(overestimation). 
 
 TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Lucy Banks  
Available 
Pomodoros: 8  
 Answer questions on thermodynamics in Ch 4  ## 
 Repeat laws of thermodynamics out loud to Mark  ##"  
 S u m m a r i z e  l a w s  o f  T h e r m o d y n a m i c s  i n  w r i t i n g  ###%$  
Figure 2.27    To Do Today Sheet: Finishing the activity with the second estimate.  
 
Since tasks don’t usually tend to last more than seven estimated Pomodoros (Rule: If It 
Lasts More Than 5-7 Pomodoros, Break It Down.), usually there are no more than three 
estimates. All the activities that require a third es timate have to be carefully reconsidered to 
understand the reasons why estimating was so complicated. 
2.3.3  Recording Estimates 
Clearly, now that we’ve introduced the concept of quantitative estimates, the objectives of the 
reporting system can be more ambitious. New objectives could be: 
! To measure the accuracy of estimates, anal yzing the gap between estimated effort and 
actual effort (estimation error) for every activity 
! To show where more estimates were needed (second or third estimates) 
Now the Records Sheet has to be modified. Depending on the case in question, the 
report could show estimates, actual effort and related error. Below two simple options for 
visualizing this information are provided. 
 
Date Time Type of Activity Description of Activity Estimate Real Diff. 
12 July 2006 10:00 Study Answer questions on thermodynamics 
in Ch 4 2 2 0 
12 July 2006 11:30 Repeat Repeat laws of thermodynamics out 
loud to Mark 3 2 -1 
12 July 2006 14:00 Summarize Summarize laws of thermodynamics 
in writing 3 4 1 
Figure 2.28    Records Sheet: Only first estimate.  
 
Date Time Type of Activity Description of Activity Estimate Real Diff I Diff II 
12 July 2006 10:00 Study Answer questions on 
thermodynamics in Ch 4  
2  
2  
0  
12 July 2006 11:30 Repeat Repeat laws of 
thermodynamics out loud 
to Mark  
3  
2  
1  
12 July 2006 14:00 Summarize Summarize laws of 
thermodynamics in 
writing  
3+2  
4  
-1  
1 
Figure 2.29     Records Sheet: First and second estimates.  
 
There are many possible ways to present the results that you’re tracking. The 
complexity of the reporting objectives is not yet too high, and reports can be had directly from 
the records sheet with just a few calculations done by hand. The more complex the calculations, 
The Pomodoro Technique 19 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006 the more you’ll want to make use of databases, spreadsheets and ad hoc  software applications. 
Remember: always keep recording activity as simple as possible.  
 
The first objective of improving quantitative estimates lies in eliminating the third 
estimate, and keeping the o verall margin of error small. The next objective is to eliminate the 
second estimate, again keeping the overall margin of error small. The final objective is to 
reduce the margin of erro r in the first estimate. 
2.3.4  Managing Exploration 
Not every activity can be estimated. At the outs et of a new project or a study activity, it’s 
especially beneficial to spend time on exploration: look for new sources, get an idea of the 
structure of the texts you have to study or consult, define your objectives more clearly. To guide 
exploration, it’s worthwhile to apply the concept of time-boxing. Decide on a number of 
Pomodoros for completing your exploration. When these Pomodoros are finished, set up your 
real work plan or start in on a specific activity  or decide if you want to keep on exploring and 
what direction you want to take. 
2.4 Objective IV: Make the Pomodoro More Effective 
When you can systematically use the Pomodoro without interruptions, and you start to master 
estimating, you can evolve the Pomodoro Technique even further. 
2.4.1  The Structure of the Pomodoro 
The first evolution has to do with the structure of the Pomodoro. The first three to five minutes 
of each Pomodoro can be used to briefly repeat what you’ve learned since the beginning of the 
activity (not just the last Pomodoro), and then to print this in your memory. The last three to 
five minutes of a Pomodoro can be used to quickly review what you’ve done (if possible, with 
an effect-cause procedure, starting from the last activities and going back to your initial 
motivations).  
 
Note    These last few minutes of the Pomodoro serve to review what you’ve done. If you want 
to check the quality and methods of your work to pinpoint potential improvement, you should 
plan one or two Pomodoros to do so. (Quicker observations are made daily during the recording 
Pomodoro.) 
 
These changes don’t require variations in the length of the 25-minute Pomodoro.  The 
enhanced awareness of time you can achieve by using the Pomodoro will enable you to 
physiologically sense the 3-5 minute intervals mentioned above. If you have a hard time doing 
so, this may be a sign that you haven’t yet mastered the basic technique. 
2.4.2  The Structure of the Pomodoro Set  
There is a second evolution that has to do with the four-Pomodoro set. As above, the 
first Pomodoro in a set of four, or part of this first Pomodoro, can be used to repeat what you’ve 
done so far. Likewise, all or part of the last Pomodoro in the set can be used to review what 
you’ve accomplished. Repetition and revision activities are more effective if you do them out 
loud or by talking with a partner or member of your team. Systematic repetition and revision 
stimulates the effects of overlearning,  facilitating the acquisition of new information.  
2.5 Objective V: Set Up a Timetable 
There are a number of reasons why you should never underestimate the importance of defining 
and respecting a timetable. 
! A timetable sets a limit. Limits (when they’re truly understood as inviolable) help us to be 
concrete, to do things. They motivate us to do our best to complete the tasks before us 
within a set period of time. The same thing happens when the Pomodoro rings. 
The Pomodoro Technique 20 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006 ! A timetable delineates the separation between work time and free time; the latter is best 
defined as time set aside for non-goal oriented or unplanned activities  ( 1 5 ) .  T h i s  l e i s u r e  
time is fuel for our minds. Without it, creativity, interest, and curiosity are lost, and we run 
ourselves down until our energy is depleted. Without gas, the engine won’t run. (4)  
! A timetable measures the results of the day. Once we’ve written up the To Do Today Sheet, 
our goal is to carry out the activities listed on it with the highest possible quality within the 
set timeframe. If time runs out and these activities aren’t done, we try to understand what 
went wrong. In the meantime, we already have an invaluable piece of information: how 
many Pomodoros we managed to work that day. 
With the Pomodoro Technique, figuring out how much time is wasted isn’t important; 
how many Pomodoros we’ve accomplished is. The next day, keep that number in mind when 
deciding how many Pomodoros are available, and write down activities to fill only those 
Pomodoros. 
 The main risk with the timetable is in underestimating how important it is; it’s easy to 
fall in the trap of not respecting it. For example, let’s say it’s 3 PM. You’ve lost time during the 
day, and you know you haven’t produced as mu ch as you could have or as much as you 
expected. So you tell yourself: “Today I’ll work late to make up for lost time.” A combination 
of heroism and guilt makes you breach the limit set by the timetable; as a result your 
performance is ineffective tonight, then tomorrow night, and then the night after. The more the 
timetable is systematically prolonged, the more overall results will diminish. Guilt intensifies. 
Why? Isn’t playing the hero enough? Don’t the h ours sacrificed in the name of work assuage 
the guilt? 
 Actually what emerges is a dangerous vicious circle: the timetable protracts, fatigue 
increases, productivity drops, the timetable protra cts. First and foremost, an effective timetable 
has to be respected. Respecting a timetable means developing immunity to the Five More 
Minutes Syndrome. When your work time is up, just like when the Pomodoro rings, all activity 
stops. Secondly, an effective timetable has to allow for the free time that’s needed to recoup. 
 
Note  It may happen that an important deadline comes up and you find yourself having to work 
longer hours. This overtime can  b e  f a c t o r e d  i n  t o  y o u r  t i m e t a b l e  t o  m o m e n t a r i l y  i n c r e a s e  
productivity. Typically to achieve positive results and avoid the risk of the vicious circle 
mentioned above, you shouldn’t work overtime for more than five days. Establish an ad hoc  
timetable for this period, and set aside a recovery  period to deal with the drop in productivity 
that will inevitably follow. 
 
2.5.1  The Best Case Scenario 
Let’s use the following timetable as an example: 8:30-1:00 / 2:00-5:30. It’s 8:30 AM. Albert 
winds up the first Pomodoro of the day. He might use this Pomodoro to look over all the things 
he did the day before, to skim over the Activity Inventory and fill in the To Do Today Sheet, 
which will also include this planning activity. In this same organizational Pomodoro, Albert 
checks that everything on his desk is in place and ready, and tidies up if it’s not. The Pomodoro 
rings, X, break. 
Another Pomodoro begins, the first operational Pomodoro. And on it goes for two more 
Pomodoros. The four-Pomodoro set is over; a longer break. Despite the fact that he really wants 
to keep on working, Albert decides to take a bit more downtime in anticipation of the intense 
work day ahead. After 20 minutes or so, he winds up a new Pomodoro. He continues for a total 
of four Pomodoros, and then checks his watch. It’s 12:53. He has just enough time to tidy up his 
desk again, put away any papers that need fili ng and check that the To Do Today Sheet is clear 
and properly filled out, and then he goes to lunch. 
By 2:00 Albert is at his desk again. He winds up the Pomodoro and gets back to work. 
He doesn’t take much of a break between one Pomodoro and the next. But after four rings he 
starts feeling tired. He still has a few more Pomodoros to go. He wants to get a good rest, and he 
tries to detach as best he can by taking a little walk. Thirty minutes later, Albert winds up a new 
Pomodoro. It rings, X, break. Albert sets aside the last Pomodoro to look over what he got done 
during the day, fill in the Records Sheet, jot down some comments on potential room for 
improvement, makes notes on the To Do Today Sheet for the next day, and tidies up his desk. 
The Pomodoro rings. Quick break. Albert looks at his watch. It’s 5:27. He straightens any 
papers that are out of place, and puts the activ ity sheets in order. At 5:30 free time begins.  
The Pomodoro Technique 21 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006 Two comments on this scenario: 
! The operational Pomodoros never coincide with  t h e  n u m b e r  o f  w o r k / s t u d y  h o u r s .  W i t h  
eight hours of work/study, two Pomodoros are earmarked for organizational activities (one 
hour) and twelve (six hours) for operational activities. 
! The time that goes by is always a secondary factor with the Pomodoro Technique. If there 
are no unhandled interruptions, the end of the morning or afternoon will be determined 
simply by the succession of Pomodoros. The timetable is reinforced by sets of Pomodoros. 
It doesn’t matter what time it is, because our guide is the sequence of Pomodoros with 
respective breaks. In terms of the timetable in our example, we have [1 +3],[4]:[4],[1+1 ]. 
2.5.2  A Scenario With Interruptions 
Let’s say it’s the second Pomodoro in the second set of the scenario above.  
 A l b e r t  g e t s  i n t e r r u p t e d  a n d  c a n ’ t  d e a l  w i t h  t h e  i n t e r r u p t i o n .  T h a t  c a n  h a p p e n .  T h e  
Pomodoro is void. Finally Albert is free to get back to work again. He checks the time. It’s 
12:20. In a few seconds he reorganizes the last session; at this point there’s only one Pomodoro 
left to do. He still takes a quick break before setting the next Pomodoro. In fact, he decides to 
take a bit more time to try to find his focus. When he feels ready, Albert winds up the 
Pomodoro and starts with the second Pomodoro in the set. (The first one was interrupted.) 
 I n  t h e  a f t e r n o o n ,  a t  t h e  e n d  o f  t h e  t h i r d  set of four Pomodoros, Albert feels like he 
needs more than a 3-5 minute break. He decides to take a half-hour walk. Before going out, he 
quickly modifies the last set, which was originally two Pomodoros long, to just one 
organizational Pomodoro. If there’s extra time, he’ll tidy up his desk and check his incoming 
emails. Albert gets back from his walk at 4:47. He winds up the Pomodoro…it rings, X, break. 
Free time.  
2.5.3  Optimizing Your Timetable  
A work day contains several Pomodoros. How should you organize them to make the day more 
effective? Optimizing your work schedule is the result of a continual process of observation and 
feedback. The objective is to reinforce the concept of a regular succession of  activity as much as 
possible. 
For people who have an entire day to study, an initial timetable might be: 8:30-12:30, 
1:30-5:30. Two sets made up of four and three Pomodoros respectively in the morning, and two 
sets consisting of four and three Pomodoros resp ectively in the afternoon: [4],[3]:[4],[3]. The 
sets determine when to take breaks. 
The Pomodoros within each set can be organized even further. For example, you could 
earmark the first Pomodoro in the first session for planning your day, and the following three 
for studying new topics, along with the next two Pomodoros from the second set. The last 
Pomodoro in the second group is set aside for checking and answering emails, listening to voice 
mail, and calling classmates, if need be. This is a way to respond effectively to possible 
interruptions intercepted during the morning. The first Pomodoro of the third set is for looking 
over what you did in the morning. The next three Pomodoros are to spend on studying. The first 
two Pomodoros of the fourth set are used to revise what you’ve learned today and in the past 
few days. The last Pomodoro of the day is destined for tracking and analyzing data. So, your 
timetable looks something like this: [1 +3],[2+1]:[1+3],[2+1 ]. 
The basic assumptions with this study schedule are that usually people are more 
productive in the morning, and more importantly the afternoon hours just after lunch are not 
very effective. Clearly, these assumptions ar e subjective. Why do we refer to an initial 
timetable? Because by gathering information on how you work/how you’re working, in other 
words by tracking metrics of Pomodoros completed and other indicators every day, students can 
learn to pinpoint which set of Pomodoros is most productive for studying,  revising, or being 
creative. Knowing this, they can consciously modify their study  schedule, starting earlier or 
later, extending certain sets and reducing others, learning to know themselves better. 
Here’s the key to organizing a timetable: make conscious decisions on how to set it up. 
Up to this point, sets of four Pomodoros ha ve been used because this amount is usually 
considered most effective. But you can also use longer or shorter sets lasting, say, three or five 
Pomodoros. At the end of the set comes a 15-30 minute break. In order to be effective, a 
timetable should also have the following features: it should be destined to change over time, and 
The Pomodoro Technique 22 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006 it can be made of sets of differing numbers of Pomodoros, giving preference to those lasting 
four Pomodoros. 
 
Note    Experience teaches that when the seasons change, your timetable needs to change too.  
 
2.6 Other Possible Objectives 
Up to this point, this paper has described the basic Pomodoro Technique. Until now, by simple 
tracking and recording activities, and with very little processing, we’ve come up with useful 
reports on effort per activity, and on errors in qu alitative or quantitative es timates. Clearly, if we 
want to improve, the reporting objectives will chan ge over time. It wouldn’t be useful to track 
and record every possible metric, obviously, but on ly the ones that enable us to observe what 
we want to consolidate or improve. The Pomodoro Technique was conceived to be flexible in 
the face of these kinds of changes. To make tracking and recording new metrics possible, we 
have to modify the different sheets, as shown in the previous paragraphs. While making these 
alterations, it’s essential to keep some key criteria in mind that serve to preserve the adaptive 
capability of the Technique. In order of importance: 
1. Always remember that using technology mean s an increase in complexity due to the 
relative learning curve, and less flexibility as compared to paper, pencil, and eraser. 
2. Keep Tracking at the lowest possible level of complexity (even delegating small tasks to 
Recording). Choose simple tools for this activity: using paper, pencil and eraser serves as a 
useful mental exercise. 
3. Keep recording simple by using the tools best suited to the complexity you have to manage. 
Before turning to a spreadsheet or a database , see if there’s a more effective way to do 
Recording with paper, pencil, and eraser. Befo re using ad hoc software, see if there’s a 
more effective way to do Recording with a spreadsheet or a database. 
4. If Processing and Visualizing become difficult, complex, and repetitive, you first have to 
ask yourself if all the metrics you’re obser ving are really necessary. If so, you should 
consider using spreadsheets, a database, or an ad hoc software program. A simple excel 
sheet can readily handle operations such as: reclassifying activities by type, filtering 
activities by word, grouping and applying calculations to selected activities. 
5. Imagination is the most powerful tool for preventing complexity from growing. 
For example, in the previous paragraphs, we looked at a case with a single objective: 
writing an article on How to Learn Music. This objective is achieved by means of a series of 
tasks. But you might find yourself having to consider a number of objectives to achieve 
simultaneously. How to you distinguish between them? 
Depending on the circumstances, you can change how you write the description, so as 
to highlight the objective (Fig. 2.30). Another option is to include a new box labeled Objectives 
in the Activity Inventory, on the To Do Today Sheet, and on the Records Sheet, where you can 
write down a description of the objective, or an abbreviation or code that stands for it. To 
calculate the total effort expended to achieve a given objective, add up the effort it took to do 
the related activities. 
 
 TO DO TODAY Rome, 12 July 2006 
Mark Ross 
 How to Learn Music : write article (max 10 pps)  
 How to Learn Music : finetune by reading out loud   
 How to Learn Music : condense to 3 pps   
Figure 2.30    To Do Today Sheet  
  
You might want to calculate how long it takes to reach certain objectives or perform 
given activities (2). To do so, you simply measure the time from the date of completion back to 
the date when you wrote in or assigned the activity. Since you already have the completion date 
for the activity (on the To Do Today Sheet), in the first case you’ll need to track the date you 
slotted that activity into the Activity Inventory; in the second case, track the date you wrote it 
on the To Do Today Sheet. On the Records Sheet you can track Pomodoros of effort over 
several days for the same activity.   
The Pomodoro Technique 23 
 
 
© Francesco Cirillo 19/10/2006  
In any case, choosing which metrics to tra ck and record has to be  subordinate to the 
choice of improvement objectives. In this case, the metrics system will grow incrementally on 
the basis of real need, keeping tracking complexity to a minimum.